successful software project and products:  

an empirical investigation 

richard berntsson-svensson 
school of information systems,  
technology and management 
university of new south wales 

sydney nsw 2052 

australia 

aybuke aurum 

school of information systems,  
technology and management 
university of new south wales 

sydney nsw 2052 

australia 

z3167700@student.unsw.edu.au 

aybuke@unsw.edu.au

 

 

abstract 
the circumstances surrounding the success and failure of software 
projects  have  been  a  topic  of  discussion  among  both  practitioners 
and  researchers  for  many  years.  a  classical  definition  of  project 
success is one that is within budget and on time. some of the most 
common  factors  identified  in  the  literature  as  leading  to  software 
project  success  are  user  involvement,  management  support  and 
realistic  requirements.  studies  have  indicated  that  managers  have 
different perceptions from software practitioners when it comes to 
defining  a  successful  software  project.  the  observation  of  this 
difference  of  opinions  has  led  us  to  the  question:  could  there  be 
different  perceptions  about  what  effect  various  factors  have  on 
software  project  success  among  different  industries?  this  paper 
presents  an  empirical  study.  firstly,  it  begins  with  a  detailed 
investigation  of  software  product  and  project  success  factors. 
secondly,  it  examines  success  factors  for  software  projects  and 
products  across  a  selection  of  different  industries,  based  on  data 
collected  from  companies  in  sweden  and  australia.  thirdly,  it 
studies  how  practitioners  in  industry  define  success  factors  for 
software projects and products. 

categories and subject descriptors 
k.6.3  [management  of  computing  and  information  systems]: 
software management  software development. 

general terms 
management, measurement. 

keywords 
product success, success factors, successful project. 
 
1.  introduction 
despite  experiencing  many  successful  software  projects,  software 
engineers  still  struggle  to  ensure  the  consistent  success  of  their 

 
permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not  made  or  distributed  for  profit  or  commercial  advantage  and  that 
copies  bear  this  notice  and  the  full  citation  on  the  first  page.  to  copy 
otherwise,  or  republish,  to  post  on  servers  or  to  redistribute  to  lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
isese'06, september 2122, 2006, rio de janeiro, brazil. 
copyright 2006 acm 1-59593-218-6/06/0009...$5.00. 
. 

projects.  most  software  engineers  will  concede  that  they  have 
experienced one of the many software project failures during their 
careers. [6, 8, 27]. 
the chaos report from the standish group [20] indicates that over 
the  years  there  has  been  great  improvement  in  the  delivery  of 
software systems that meet business objectives within budget and on 
schedule.  the  report  shows  that  in  1994,  31%  of  all  software 
projects failed and only 16% of the projects were successful [18]. 
four years later, only 28% of the projects failed and the success rate 
had increased to 26% [19]. another two years later, the success rate 
had increased to 28% while only 23% of all projects failed [20].  
while the chaos report presents an encouraging view, others have 
argued  that  the  measure  of  success  will  vary depending on how 
you define it. successful software projects have been described as 
projects  that  are  completed  within  budget,  on  schedule,  and  that 
meet  business  objectives  [8,  12,  18].  others  have  suggested  that 
success  depends  on  the  perspective  of  stakeholders.  linberg  [12] 
found  that  there  are  differences  of  opinion  between  project 
participants  (developers)  and  managers when it comes to defining 
what constitutes a successful software project. linbergs conclusion 
suggests that a new theory of success might be needed. this theory 
would  account  for  differences  in  opinions  and  experiences  across 
different  industries  with  regard  to  success  factors  in  software 
development. 
in  the  context  above,  our  literature  review  revealed  three  issues. 
firstly,  there  are  several  studies  in  software  engineering  and 
information  systems  literature  that  investigate  success  factors  in 
software projects. however, their findings do not always correlate 
with one another given the differing nature of the projects and the 
industries that have been investigated (see table 1). secondly, we 
found that the previous research findings for project success factors 
overlap with product success factors. in other words, project success 
factors are intertwined with project success factors [3, 25]. thirdly, 
to the best of our knowledge, no study has specifically investigated 
how software practitioners define software product success factors 
in an industrial context. 
the objective of this article is to explore project and product success 
factors  in  the  software  industry,  namely  the  financial  services, 
consulting and telecommunications industries. furthermore, it aims 
to compare the views of respondents of different types of industries 
as to the factors that lead to software project and product success 
and as to what constitutes a successful software project and product. 
this article presents the results of an empirical study, based on data 
collected from 27 software projects at 11 companies in sweden and 

australia,  in  an  attempt  to  assist  practitioners  and  researchers  to 
share their perspectives. 
the  contribution  of  this  article  is  two  fold:  (1)  it  provides  a 
comparison  of  success  factors  for  software  projects  and  products 
between  different  industries  based  on  data  from  the  industries 
themselves,  and  (2)  it  studies  how practitioners  in  industry  define 
success factors for software projects and products. 
the  remainder  of  this  paper  is  organized  as  follows:  in  section  2 
related  works  are  reviewed.  section  3  presents  the  research 
methodology that was used and how the research design. section 4 
presents the results while section 5 discusses the findings. in section 
6, the validity of the research is discussed and the conclusions are 
presented in section 7. 

2.  related work 
this section presents how the literature defines successful software 
projects and products as well as which key factors leads to project 
success.  
2.1 defining project and product success 
what  is  a  successful  software  project?  a  classical  definition  of 
project  success,  as  mentioned  earlier,  is  one  that  is  within  budget 
and on time. the most common definition of project success is the 
one  from  the  standish  study  [18],  which  defines  software  project 
success  as  meeting  budget,  delivery,  and  business  objectives. 
kerzner [9] also defines project success as completed within time, 
within  budget,  within  scope,  meeting  performance  requirements, 
and  obtaining  user  acceptance.  according  to  lewis  [11],  project 
success could be defined as meeting performance requirements, cost 
requirements,  time  restrictions,  and  project  scope.  there  are 
instances, however, where projects that meet all of these factors are 
not necessarily viewed as successful. on the other hand, there are 
projects  that  do  not  meet  above  criteria,  but  that  are  considered 
successful nonetheless [11].  
in  addition,  product  success  is  not  readily  defined,  although  it  is 
generally  regarded  as  being  a  product 
that  satisfies  user 
requirements. there is little information in the literature about the 
definition of successful software products. existing studies [7, 25] 
that discuss software products usually refer to them in the context of 
software projects, without detailed and dedicated discussion. 
2.2 project success versus product success 
baccarini [2] argues that project success requires a combination of 
project  management  success  and  project  product  success.  project 
management  success  is  related  to  the  efficiency  of  the  project 
management process in terms of cost, time and quality. on the other 
hand, project product success is related to the effectiveness of the 
end  product.  according  to  baccarini  [2]  project  success  can  be 
summarized as follows: 
project  success  =  project  management  success  +  project  product 
success 

several researchers point out the causal relationship between project 
management success and project product success [2, 15, 22]. on the 
one  hand,  a  project  that  is  over  budget  and  over  time  can  be 
considered a failure; however, the end product can still be a success 
[22]. on the other hand, a project within budget and on time may be 
considered successful; however the end product may be a failure [3, 
12].  
2.3 identifying project success factors 
in order to obtain a better understanding of software project success 
factors  we  examined  project  success  factors  across  non-software 
related industries e.g. new product development in the toy industry 
[3]. interestingly, we found out that there was no detailed process 
model  for  new  product  development.  instead,  the  focus  was  on 
building prototypes until the product was right, met the necessary 
quality  standards  and  was  ready  to  be  manufactured.  once  the 
product was delivered to manufacturing, updates and changes were 
uncommon as this was seen as an expensive process. that is, a great 
deal of effort was put into perfecting the design process. in software 
development,  developers  (who  effectively  manufacture 
the 
software  product)  are  relatively  more  flexible  with  updating  and 
changing  the  end  product,  even  after  design  phase  has  been 
completed. in the toy industry, project and product success can be 
equated. in the software industry, as mentioned earlier, this is not 
the case. 
however,  in  terms  of  project  and  product  success  factors  both 
industries have addressed similar issues. table 1 illustrates software 
project factors from various studies. as illustrated in table 1, results 
from 8 separate studies present different success factors. this may 
be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  studies  were  conducted  in  different 
industries or at different companies. alternatively, the nature of the 
software  project  may  play  a  role  in  the  outcome  of  these  studies. 
regrettably, this sort of information was not available in the articles 
that we reviewed. 
2.4 project categories 
a software project can involve software development, maintenance 
or an enhancement. the present study categorizes software projects 
based on specific customer-supplier relationships as follows:  
  bespoke  software  development:  the  supplier  develops  a  new 
custom-made  product  or  service  for  one  or  a  couple  of 
customers. 

  market driven software development: the supplier develops a 

product for a specific market without a predefined customer. 

  a  mix  of  bespoke  and  market  driven  software  development: 
the supplier develops a product for a specific market, but with 
the intention that it is possible to sell the product to customers 
with customization. 
in-house  software  development:  the  supplier  also  is  the 
customer.  the  system  is  developed  for  the  own  company  or 
organization. 

 

in  this  paper,  when  presenting  our  research  we  use  above 
classification. 

table 1. literature success factors 

literature 

linberg 
[12] 

standish 
group [20] 

nah et al. 
[13] 
milis and 
mercken 
[14] 

procaccino 
et al. [16] 

verner and 
cerpa [23] 

procaccino 
et al. [17] 

product type 

project 
type 
bespoke  medical 

instrument 

na 

na 

na 

na 

na 

na 

na 

enterprise 
systems 
information 
communication 
technology 
systems 
na 

na 

na 

verner and 
evanco [24] 

in-house  na 

na: not available 

project size 

2 years with a 
budget of us $ 
1 million 
na 

na 

1 year with a 
budget over  
1.5 million 

na 

na 

na 

na 

company 
type 
medical 
instruments 

na 

na 

banks and 
insurance 

financial 
institution 

insurance, 
banks, 
finance 
na 

banks, 
financial 
institutions, 
insurance 

country 

success factors 

usa 

usa 

na 

belgium 

na 

australia 

usa 

usa 

technical challenge, working product, well 
designed product, high performing project 
team, no schedule pressure 
user involvement, executive support, 
experienced project manager, clear business 
objectives, minimized scope, firm basic 
requirements 
top management support, business plan and 
vision,  effective communication 
management involvement and support,  
project definition, project team,  project plan, 
change management, proper project resources 

customer/user involvement, sponsor support, 
project manager authority, enough time for 
requirement elicitation 
skilled project manager, good and complete 
requirements, good schedule and estimates, 
working long hours 
clear and understandable requirements,  
skilled team, feedback from project manager,  
defined methodology 
good project manager,  good requirements, 
good project vision, project manager 
communication skills, working long hours 

3.  methodology 
the primary objective of this study is to investigate software project 
and  product  success  factors  in  software  industry.  the  following 
research questions provided a focus for our empirical investigation 
in swedish and australian companies:  
(1) what is the effect of certain factors on the success or failure of 
projects across various industries?  
(2) how do various industries define project success and are there 
any differences across industries?  
(3) how do various industries define product success and are there 
any differences across industries? 
a  quantitative  questionnaire  [3]  was  designed  to  evaluate  the 
research  questions.  several  pilot  studies  performed  to  validate  the 
questionnaire.  the  questionnaire  included  33,  mostly  close-ended 
questions. however, open-ended and weighted questions were also 
included in the questionnaire. ethical clearance was obtained before 
the research was conducted in australia.  
the  questionnaire  consisted  of  three  parts.  part  1  contained 
questions for gathering background information about the subjects. 
this  included  demographic  information  such  as  contact  details, 
gender, academic background, experience in software development, 
position  at  current  company,  and  company  information.  part  2 
contained close-ended questions about the subjects last completed 
software project. the questions addressed different factors and were 
answered  using  a  six-point  or  a  three  point  scale.  part  2  also 
contained  open-ended  questions  to  allow  participants  provide 

answers  using  their  own  thoughts  and  words.  part  3  contained 
questions  about  software  products  for  which  the  subjects  were 
involved in development. this part contained open-ended questions 
and a question that allowed participants to assign weights to a series 
of  options.  this  made  it  possible  for  us  to  ascertain  the  relative 
importance of each factor. the subjects were given 1000 points to 
spend among nine factors (subjects had the opportunity to add their 
own factors). subjects could spend the points however they wished 
(i.e.  one  factor  could  be  assigned  1000  points);  with  the  only 
exception  being  that  two  factors  could  not  be  given  the  same 
number of points. 

3.1  data collection 
data  was  collected  from  swedish  and  australian  companies.  the 
population  in  this  study  was  software  practitioners  and  managers 
from  the  financial  services,  consulting,  and  telecommunications 
industries.  a  probability  sampling  method  was  used  because  it 
provides  the  researcher  with  a  good  selection  process  of  samples 
from a large known population [1]. samples were selected in two 
different ways: through contacts we had working at companies and 
from a list of randomly selected software development companies. 
the participants (subjects) from each company were selected by the 
contact person at that company. this study used two forms for data 
collection:  structured 
interviews  and  emailed  questionnaires. 
emailed  questionnaires  were  used  to  facilitate  larger  sample  sizes 
and  to  minimize  the  time  taken  for  data  collection  and  analysis. 
there are potential risks with emailed questionnaires, such as lack 
of interest and time, and a low response rate. therefore, structured 

interviews were used to increase the reliability of the data collected 
[1]. 
to  obtain  an  understanding  of  the  collected  data  we  use  the 
phenomenology [5] method. first we sorted the data into different 
sources  and  put  the  collected  data  onto  paper.  then  we  start  to 
divide the data into small piles of categories and put a name on each 
pile, descriptive of the content of the pile. we read each pile over 
and over until a deeper understanding of the piles was obtained. 

than  one  response  due 

4.  results 
our sample size was relatively small; however it was large enough 
to  conduct  relevant  analysis  to  provide  some  awareness  of  the 
different definitions of project success between different industries. 
the questionnaire for this study was sent to 15 companies (eight in 
sweden  and  seven  in  australia)  resulting  in  27  responses.  some 
companies  provided  more 
their 
involvement in a variety of different projects. thus, it was possible 
to treat the responses as independent of one another for the purposes 
of statistical analysis. the industry-wise spread of responses was: 10 
from 
(1  market-driven 
development,  8  mix  of  bespoke  and  market-driven  development, 
and  1  in-house  development),  9  from  the  consulting  industry  (3 
bespoke  development,  2  market-driven  development,  2  mix  of 
bespoke  and  market-driven  development,  and  2 
in-house 
development), and 8 from the financial services industry (6 in-house 
development,  1  market-driven  development,  and  1  bespoke 
development). 

industry 

the 

telecommunications 

to 

4.1  demographics and project background 
although from different industries, the subjects of this study shared 
commonalities  in  terms  of  their  backgrounds.  about  half  of  the 
subjects had a bachelors degree and 55% of them were managers. 
in  addition,  about  75%  of  the  subjects  were  male  and  25%  were 
female. the average age group for the financial services was 36-40 
years while the average years the subjects had spent working at their 
current  company  was  16  years.  notably,  for  the  consulting  and 
telecommunications  industries  the  average  age of participants was 
31-35  years.  projects  in  financial  services  typically  involved  35 
people with project duration averaging 12 months. in the consulting 
industry  team  size  averaged  19  people  with  an  average  project 
duration  of  16  months.  in  the  telecommunications  industry  the 
average team had 61 people with average project duration being 13 
months. all three industries had approximately 75% success rate for 
their software projects. 

4.2  software project success factors 
in analysing research question 1, this section examines the project 
success factors for three industry types. after detailed examination 
of the literature, we considered 15 factors related to project success 
and failure, as illustrated in table 2. we asked subjects to examine 
each factor and decide which factors most strongly characterized the 
projects  that  they  participated  in.  table  2  presents  the  number  of 
successful and failed projects that were characterized by each factor, 
sorted by industry. we found that the factors had differing effects on 
project success and failure depending on the industry concerned. for 
example,  in  the  financial  services  industry,  33%  of  all  successful 
projects changed their project manager, whereas in failed projects, 
100% of the projects changed their project manager. although this 
seems to be an interesting result, when we examine the results from 

enough time for requirements elicitation 

the consulting and telecommunications industries, the findings were 
not  necessarily  consistent  with  the  financial  services  industry.  in 
other  words,  in  both  the  consulting  and  telecommunications 
industries, although 50% of the failed projects changed their project 
manager,  for  successful  projects,  this  was  only  57%  and  63% 
respectively. the following summarizes our findings. 
financial services 
in  the  financial  services  industry,  the  factors  that  influenced  most 
project success were: 
  complete and accurate requirements from project start 
  good schedule estimates 
 
  well-defined project scope 
  rewarding staff for working long hours 
identifying risk before the start of the project was a factor that most 
successful  projects  fulfilled  in  the  financial  services  industry. 
however,  since 40% of failed projects also identified risks before 
project start, it was not possible to state that risk identification was 
related  to  project  success.  the  two  factors  that  were  related  to 
project failure were: 
  changing the project manager 
  adding extra personnel to meet schedule estimates 
we  found  out  that  the  remaining  factors  had  no  effect  on  project 
success or project failure for financial services. they were: 
 
  complete requirements (when not complete from project start) 

support for working long hours 

during the project 

  use of a specific method for requirements gathering 
 
project manager understood the customers problem 
  customer/user involvement 
  commitment and support from sponsor/project champion 
  risk identification before project start 
subjects were asked who was responsible for estimating the project 
schedule however, due to the many variations and combinations of 
answers  we  received;  it  was  not  possible  to  find  any  patterns  in 
terms of a) who was consistently responsible for estimation and b) a 
particular  person  consistently  being  responsible  project  success  or 
failure. 
consulting  
as  illustrated  in  table  2,  the  following  factors  affected  project 
success: 
  complete and accurate requirements from project start 
 
  good schedule estimates 
since half of all failed projects for the consulting industry had a well 
defined  project  scope,  it  was  not  possible  to  conclude  that  a  well 
defined project scope was related to project success. 
we  found  that  the  following  two  factors  played  a  major  role  in 
project failure: 
 
  adding extra personnel to meet schedule estimates 

project manager support working long hours 

enough time for requirements elicitation 

the 

factors 

industry, 

the 

it  was  not  possible  to  relate  staff  rewarded  for  long  hours  to 
project failure because half of all successful projects rewarded their 
staff for working long hours. interestingly, more failed projects had 
an experienced project manager than did the successful projects. as 
in the case of the financial services industry, there were no pattern 
with respect to who was responsible for estimating project schedules 
or  to  indicate  that  a  specific  person  consistently  led  to  project 
success or failure due to the many variations and combinations of 
answers we received. 
telecommunication industry 
for 
telecommunication 
influenced project success: 
  complete and accurate requirements from project start 
  completing  the  requirements  (if  not  complete  from  project 

following 

start) during the project 
enough time for requirements elicitation 

 
  use of a specific method for requirements gathering 
we were unable to identify any specific methods that were used for 
requirements gathering due to there being too many variations in the 
answers received from subjects. furthermore, no patterns could be 
found based on a) who was consistently responsible for estimation 
and  b)  a  particular  person  consistently  being  responsible  project 
success  or  failure.  commitment  and  support  from  sponsor/project 
champion  may  be  related  to  project  success  since  100%  of  all 
successful projects had obtained such a commitment. however, half 
of  all  the  failed  projects  also  had  commitment  and  support  from 
sponsors/project champions. therefore, we could not conclude that 
this factor was related to project success for the telecommunications 
industry.  additionally,  60%  of  all  projects  used  their  project 
manager for creating the schedule. eighty-six of these projects were 
successful. thus, the use of a project manager to create the schedule 
was positively related to project success. 
none of the factors were found to be related to project failure, i.e. 
the  remaining  11  factors  (table  2)  did  not  have  any  effect  on 

project  success  or  failure  for  the  telecommunications  industry. 
furthermore,  more  failed  than  successful  projects  had  a  well 
defined project scope. this was not inline with previous findings 
in the literature [14, 24] that suggested the importance of a well 
defined project scope in achieving project success. 
4.3  contrasting industry perceptions of 
project success 
this section refers to research question 2, i.e. how project success is 
defined by the industry. based on detailed examination of empirical 
work  in  literature  and  after  conducting  three  pilot  studies,  we 
identified 18 factors that were related to project success. we asked 
subjects  to  select  the  three  most  important  as  well  as  three  least 
important  factors  for  a  project  to  be  successful  based  on  their 
personal  beliefs.  the  findings  for  all  three  industry  types  are 
presented in table 3. 

from  table  3  we  see  that  subjects  from  both  the  consulting  and 
telecommunications  industries  agreed  that  understanding  the 
customers  problem  was  an  important  factor  in  project  success. 
apart from this agreement, each industry felt that different factors 
characterized  successful  projects.  interestingly,  not  a  single 
respondent from any industry thought that good schedule was an 
important factor for project success. this was an interesting finding 
since the subjects personal views of a good schedule differed from 
the results they provided when asked about the characteristics of the 
last  project  they  participated  in.  that  is,  subjects  from  financial 
services  and  consulting  industries  had  stated  earlier  that  good 
schedule  estimates  were  related  to  project  success  for  the  last 
software project they were involved in (see table 2). furthermore, 
subjects  from  the  financial  services  considered  a  committed 
sponsor and overall good requirements as among the three most 
important factors for project success, while these two factors were 
considered  among  the  three  least  important  by  subjects  from  the 
consulting industry. 

table 2. percentage of projects fulfilling each factor 
factor 

 
project changed pm 
pm supported long hours 
staff rewarded for long hours 
use of specific requirements method 
completed and accurate requirements form the start 
     - if not, completed during project 
enough allocated time for requirements elicitation 
project's scope well defined 
extra personnel added to met schedule timetable 
commitment  and  support 
champion 
experience project manager 
project manager understood the customers problem 
customer involved in the project 
risk identification before project start 
good schedule estimations 

from  sponsor/project 

financial services 

consulting industry 

successful 

33% 
50% 
17% 
100% 
17% 
100% 
67% 
83% 
33% 
100% 

90% 
80% 
80% 
70% 
60% 

failed 
100% 
50% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
0% 
100% 
100% 

70% 
90% 
70% 
40% 
20% 

successful 

57% 
33% 
50% 
100% 
29% 
100% 
71% 
83% 
29% 
71% 

40% 
70% 
60% 
80% 
80% 

failed 
50% 
100% 
100% 
100% 
0% 
100% 
0% 
50% 
100% 
100% 

50% 
60% 
60% 
60% 
30% 

telecommunication 
industry 
successful 

63% 
100% 
50% 
100% 
29% 
67% 
50% 
38% 
71% 
100% 

80% 
70% 
80% 
80% 
60% 

failed 
50% 
100% 
50% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
0% 
50% 
100% 
50% 

60% 
40% 
50% 
50% 
40% 

another  interesting  difference  was  in  how  the  industries  viewed 
good  relations  between  personnel  as  affecting  project  success. 
while it was viewed as the most important factor for project success 
in  the telecommunications industry, the financial services subjects 
considered it to be one of the least important factors. furthermore, 
financial services subjects considered good estimations as one of the 
three least important factors bearing on project success. not a single 
subject from financial services considered good estimates as being 
an important factor, which is surprising since good estimations is 
mentioned  in  previous  literature  [23]  as  an  important  factor  for 
project success. 
subjects  from  financial  services  personally  viewed  customer 
involvement and a committed sponsor as the two most important 
factors  for  project  success,  which  was  not  inline  with  the 
characteristics of their latest project (table 2). although 80% of all 
successful  projects  involved  the  customer  and  100%  of  the 
successful ones had commitment from a sponsor, these factors could 
not be conclusively stated as important factors for project success. 
this is because 70% of all failed projects also involved the customer 
while 100% of failed projects had commitment from a sponsor. 
the  consulting  industry  subjects  personal  views  indicated  that 
understanding the customers problem was an unimportant factor 
for  project  success.  this  did  not  align  with  the  characteristics  of 
their 
the 
customers problem was not a factor related to project success for 
subjects from the consulting industry, it was still an important factor 

latest  project  (table  2).  although  understanding 

in general. this is illustrated in table 2 where 70% of all successful 
projects involved an understanding of the customers problem. 
subjects  from  the  telecommunications  industry  personally  viewed 
complete and accurate requirements as a success factor. this was 
inline  with  the  characteristics  of  their  latest  project,  allowing  a 
positive relationship to be inferred between complete and accurate 
requirements  and  project  success  (table  2).  furthermore,  the 
subjects considered understanding the customers problem as an 
important factor for project success. even though understanding the 
customers  problem  is  related  to  project  success  based  on  the 
characteristics  of  their  latest  project,  table  2  illustrates  the 
importance of this factor (70% of the successful projects understood 
the customers problem). 

4.4  software product success factors 
in  analyzing  research  question  3,  this  section  examines  how 
product  success  is  defined  by  subjects  from  all  three  industries. 
we  identified  10  potential  factors  from  previous  literature.  the 
subjects  were  asked  to  rank  the  importance  of  each  factor  for 
product success by assigning points to each factor. they were told 
no  two factors could be assigned  with the same amount of points 
and  no  factor  could have a zero value. table 4 presents the three 
most and least important factors for product success and how many 
points (percentage of total points spent by each industry) each factor 
received from the subjects. 

table 3. software project success factors according to software practitioners 
 
three  most  important 
success factors 

financial services 
customer involvement 
committed sponsor 

consulting  industry 
very good project manager 
understanding customers problem 

overall good requirements 

well defined communication 

 
three  least  important 
success factors 

 
good schedule 
good relation between personnel 
good estimates 

 
good schedule 
committed sponsor 
overall good requirements 

 
table 4. software product success factors according to software practitioners 

 

financial services 

consulting  industry 

three  most  important 
success factors 

 
three  least  important 
success factors 

satisfied customer (20%) 
the product works (15%) 

satisfied customer (22%) 
great quality (17%) 
satisfied top management (13%)  economic benefit for the supplier (13%) 
 
project team satisfaction (1%) 
good reputation for the supplier 
(4%) 
many sold copies (4%) 

 
project team satisfaction (1%) 
satisfied top management (2%) 

many sold copies (4%) 

telecommunication  industry 
good relation between personnel 
understanding customers 
problem 
complete and accurate 
requirements 
 
good schedule 
experienced project manager 
committed sponsor 

telecommunication  
industry 
satisfied customer (30%) 
customer comes back (18%) 
the product works (15%) 
 
many sold copies (4%) 
economic benefit for the 
supplier (5%) 
satisfied top management 
(5%) 

the results show that the subjects from all three industries agreed 
that a satisfied customer was the most important factor for product 
success. subjects from both the consulting and telecommunications 
industries  considered  a  working  product  as  an  important  factor. 
furthermore,  subjects  from  both 
the  financial  services  and 
consulting  industries  considered  project  team  satisfaction  as 
unimportant  for  product  success.  also  among  the  least  important 
factors for product success (as agreed by the various industries) was 
many sold copies. 
the  financial  services  subjects  felt  that  the  satisfaction  of  top 
management was one of the most important factors in determining 
product  success,  while  the  consulting  and  telecommunications 
industry subjects considered this factor as unimportant. in addition, 
consulting  industry  subjects  considered  economic  benefits  for  the 
supplier  as  important.  however,  the  telecommunications  industry 
subjects  saw  this  as  unimportant  for  achieving  product  success. 
furthermore,  financial  services subjects did not consider the good 
reputation of the supplier as an important factor for product success. 
in fact, it was seen as one of the three least important factors. 

5.  discussion 
the  section  presents  a  discussion  around  perceived  relationships 
based  on  the  results  presented  in  section  4.  we  were  unable  to 
conduct  statistical  calculations  to  uncover  significant  connections 
between  factors  and  project  success  due  to  the  limited  number  of 
data points. all stated relations between factors and project success 
or failure were arrived at through the use of deductive logic. 

5.1  effect of certain factors on the success or 
failure of projects  
there  were  both  differences  and  similarities  between  the  industry 
types when it came to perceptions of what affect certain factors had 
on project success and failure. there were two factors that all three 
industry  types  considered  as  important  for  project  success:  (1) 
complete  and  accurate  requirements  from  project  start  and  (2) 
having  enough  time  for  requirements  elicitation.  it  was  not 
surprising  to  see  that  complete  and  accurate  requirements  lead  to 
project success, confirming what was stated in the literature [17, 20, 
23,  24].  in  this  research  study  not  a  single  failed  project  and  less 
than  a  third  of  the  successful  projects  started  with  complete 
requirements.  since  the  importance  of  complete  requirements  is 
well  known,  why  do  projects  start  without  complete  and  accurate 
requirements?  one  explanation  could  be  time  to  market.  it  is 
important 
time,  otherwise 
competitors may release it first or the software may be too old or no 
longer meet customer requirements. another explanation could be 
that  requirements  elicitation  is  a  continual  process,  for  example, 
prototyping. in fact, one subject stated: 
they can never be completed...there is always more... 
alternatively  it  could  be  the  lack  of  time  for  requirements 
elicitation.  more  than  half  of  the  successful  projects  from  each 
industry  had  enough  time  for  requirements  elicitation.  however, 
none  of  the  failed  projects  from  any  industry  type  had  time  for 
requirements  elicitation.  this  result  could  explain  why  the  failed 
projects  started  without  complete  requirements.  why  would  a 
supplier  start  projects  without  enough  time  for  requirements 
elicitation?  is 
it  because  of  pressure  from  customers  and 
stakeholders  etc.?  what  is  surprising  is  that  completion  of 

to  release  software  at 

the  right 

requirements during the project itself was only found to be related to 
the  success  of  projects  in  the  telecommunications  industry.  this 
factor was reported by subjects as having no effect on the success of 
software  in  the  financial  services  and  consulting  industries.  one 
explanation for this difference is that requirements were completed 
during the project for both the successful and failed projects for the 
financial services and consulting and therefore could not be seen as 
a success factor. 
subjects from both the financial services and consulting industries 
considered  a  good  schedule  to  be  an  important  factor  in  project 
success, which aligned with findings in the literature [24]. however, 
subjects from the telecommunications industry did not agree on this 
point. a well-defined project scope is stated in the literature [19, 20] 
as a success factor, but this study shows that only subjects from the 
financial  services  industry  supported  such  a  finding.  more  failed 
than  successful  projects  had  a  well-defined  project  scope  in  the 
experience of subjects from the telecommunications industry. this 
was surprising because, if there is no clear vision of the project it 
may  lead  to  poorly  defined  goals,  poor  requirements,  unrealistic 
deadlines, and a poor project plan [3]. it is also common sense that 
if you do not know what should be included in the project, then it is 
difficult to deliver on time, within budget, and what the customer 
wants.  
adding extra personnel to meet the project schedule was found to be 
related  to  project  failure  in  the  financial  services  and  consulting 
industries. adding more personnel to a late project only increased 
the risk of project failure [3]. however, adding more personnel did 
not always lead to project failure, as illustrated in table 2. it would 
be  interesting  to  find  out  at  what  stage  the  extra  personnel  were 
added  to  successful  projects.  if  they  were  added  during  the 
requirements  elicitation  phase  they  may  not  affect  the  project  as 
much  since  it  is  an  early  phase  of  the  project.  alternatively,  the 
successful projects may have merely added more software testers to 
run test cases. this would not affect the success of a project as much 
as, for example, a new developer having to learn the code in detail 
with assistance from others. for the consulting industry, support for 
working long hours seems to be related to project failure. however, 
based  on  the  results  in  this  study  it  was  not  possible  to  state 
conclusively  whether  supporting  working  long  hours  affected 
project success. this is because the results merely indicated that the 
project manager supported working long hours, not if they actually 
worked long hours. as one subject stated: 
pm supported, but was no need for long hours 
changing the project manager may be related to project failure for 
the financial services industry. however, it was not possible to state 
conclusively in this study that this was the case, as there were no 
follow-up  questions  about  why  the  project  manager  was  changed. 
this is one of the issues that need to be studied further in future. 
although  the  literature  [20]  emphasizes  end  user  (customer) 
involvement as an important factor for project success, this finding 
was  not  reflected  in  this  study.  another  surprising  finding  was 
related to the absence of a relationship between experienced project 
managers and successful projects, which was strongly emphasized 
in [20, 23, 24]. it is also surprising because the subjects commented 
the importance of an experienced project manager when asked why 
their project was successful. one subject said: 

 ...an experienced pm stepped into the arena that was experienced 
enough 
to  question  customer  originally  requirements,  own 
organization  estimates  etc.  and  creating  a  good  (open,  honest) 
communication climate. 
one explanation for this finding in  terms of the financial services 
and telecommunications industries is that most of the successful and 
failed projects had experienced project managers (table 2). for the 
consulting  industry  more  failed  projects  had  experienced  project 
managers than successful ones. one reason could be the nature of 
the projects themselves. for instance, the failed projects could have 
been so called breakthrough projects, seen as difficult projects, or 
using new and unknown technology which also has higher risk of 
failure.  

5.2  important factors for project success 
the  various  industry  subjects  had  the  same  perceptions  about  the 
three  most  important  characteristics  for  a  successful  project,: 
meeting business objectives, on time and within budget completion, 
and meeting quality requirements. this definition is inline with the 
standish  group  [18]  definition.  this  means  that  the  literature  and 
industry use the same definition. however, it is not always easy to 
define what a successful project is. even if the project fulfills all the 
requirements for a successful project, it can still be a failure. this 
statement is supported by one of the subjects that said: 
if  a  project  is  run  perfectly  according  to  books  its  a  good 
project, but not necessarily a successful one 
the subjects also support baccarini [2] definition of project success, 
which is illustrated in section 2.2. the subjects explained why their 
project was successful: 
business people still using the product after 2 years 
delivered a successful product to a previous customer 
one subject explained why the project failed: 
when  software  finally  was  delivered,  business  situation  had 
changed which meant that the product was never used 
there was a difference between financial services, consulting, and 
telecommunications industries when it came to the subjects listing 
the most important factors for project success (table 3). 
the  financial  services  industry  subjects  were  the  only  ones  to 
consider  customer  involvement  as  important.  one  explanation  for 
this  could  be  that  the  consulting  industry  considers  this  factor  as 
obvious  since  they  are  hired  directly  by  their  customers.  the 
telecommunications industry on the other hand has a different kind 
of  customer-supplier  relationship.  most  of  the  projects  (80%)  in 
telecommunication  industry  had  a  mix  of  bespoke  and  market 
driven  customer-supplier  relationship,  which  is  not  the  case  in 
financial  services  or  consulting  industry.  this  may  be  the 
explanation  to  why  the  subjects  from  telecommunication  industry 
do not see customer involvement as important. another explanation 
could  be  that  the  subjects  considered  understanding  customers 
problem as an important factor for project success. if the problem 
is understood, it may not be needed for the customer to be involved. 
furthermore,  subjects  from  the  financial  services  industry  did  not 
view understanding the customers problem as important, while the 
consulting and telecommunications industries did. one explanation 
for  this  could  be  that  the  financial  services  interpreted  the 

importance of ensuring customer involvement (important factor for 
project  success  according  to  financial  services)  as  a  way  to 
understand the customers problem. if the customer is involved, the 
supplier  has  the  ability  to  ask  questions,  which  is  the  same  as 
understanding  the  problem.  that  the  financial  services  consider 
customer involvement as an important factor for project success is 
not inline with the findings from a study by [17].  
another  interesting  finding  is  how  subjects  from  the  financial 
services  and  telecommunications  industries  rate  the  influence  of 
good relations between personnel on project success. this factor 
was seen as the most important factor for project success by subjects 
from  the  telecommunications  industry,  while  subjects  from  the 
financial  services  industry  saw  this  as  one  of  the  least  important 
factors. it is surprising to see that a good schedule is not seen as 
an  important  factor  for  any  of  the  industries.  having  a  good 
schedule is stated in literature [20] as an important factor for project 
success.  subjects  from  the  financial  services  industry  considered 
overall good requirements and committed sponsor/champion as 
important factors for project success. these two factors were seen as 
two of the three least important factors by subjects in the consulting 
industry,  while  subjects  in  the  telecommunications  industry  rated 
committed  sponsor/champion  among  the  three  least  important 
factors  for  project  success.  subjects  from  the  consulting  industry 
were  the  only  ones  to  view  very  good  project  managers  as  an 
important factor for project success. this is surprising considering 
the  results  presented  in  table  2  which  shows  that  the  consulting 
industry had fairly inexperienced project managers involved in their 
successful projects. 

the  consulting  and 

5.3  important factors for product success 
there were interesting findings when comparing the personal views 
of subjects across all three industries on what constituted important 
success  factors  for  products.  firstly,  all  subjects  considered  a 
satisfied  customer  as  being  the  most  important  factor  for  product 
success. this is not surprising; if the customer is unhappy they may 
not return to the supplier in the future. in addition, subjects from the 
financial  services  industry  considered  great  quality  as  important, 
while  subjects  from 
telecommunications 
industries considered a working product as an important factor for 
product  success.  this  result  may  be  due  to  differences  in  their 
interpretation of the meaning of great quality (great quality may 
include a working product). this was supported by two statements 
from the subjects: 
quality of the product kept to customers expectations 
delivering good-enough quality products that satisfy requirements 
and that is perceived by the customer to be of high quality and 
meet requirements. 
furthermore,  subjects 
industry 
considered a satisfied organization/top management as an important 
factor  for  product  success  while  subjects  from  the  consulting  and 
telecommunications industries saw this as one of the least important 
factors. one possible explanation for this result may be related to 
what category the different projects from each industry belongs to. 
in financial services, 75% of the participated projects are in-house 
projects,  while  this  figure  is  only  10%  for  telecommunications 
industry  and  22%  for  the  consulting.  since  a  majority  of  the 
financial  services  projects  are  in-house,  the  organization/top 
management needs to be satisfied with the developed system to be 

financial  services 

from 

the 

in 

from 

subjects 

received 

able to consider the product successful. another difference between 
responses 
the  consulting  and 
telecommunications  industries  was  the  economic  benefits  for  the 
supplier. while subjects from the consulting industry saw this factor 
as  the  third  most  important  for  project  success,  subjects  from  the 
telecommunications industry considered economic benefits to be the 
second  least  important  success  factor  for  product  success.  our 
findings were consistent with literature i.e. it is not easy to define a 
successful  product.  one  subject  indicated  that  the  word  success 
needs  to  be  defined  before  it  is  possible  to  ask  what  a  successful 
product is: 
can not be answered it depends on what type you produces, there 
are excellent products that does not sell anything and vise versa. so 
the word success has to be defined 
another subject defined a successful product in the case of a mix of 
bespoke and market-driven development as: 
mix of bespoke and market driven is successful if the product is 
actually used by a customer 
the following section focuses on validity threats of this study. 

industry  experience,  and  roles 

6.  validity 
four types of threats should be addressed in this study [26].  
internal validity: this threat is related to issues that may affect the 
causal relationship between treatment and outcome. we believe that 
there  is  low  threat  to  internal  validity  in  this  study.  the  research 
instrument  in  this  study  was  developed  with  close  reference  to 
literature  relating  to  success  factors  for  projects  and  products.  in 
addition,  several  pilot  studies  were  performed  to  ensure  that  the 
questions  in  the  research  instrument  related  to  the  stated  research 
objectives  of  this  research  study.  the  selected  participants  in  this 
study  had  to  participate  in  at  least  one  completed  (delivered  or 
in  academic 
cancelled)  software  project.  the  differences 
backgrounds, 
in  participants 
organizations were also documented. 
external  validity:  this  threat  is  concerned  with  the  ability  to 
generalize the findings beyond the actual study. there are two such 
threats to external validity that are relevant for this study: interaction 
of selection and treatment, and interaction of history and treatment 
[26].  the  participants  selected  for  this  study  were  from  different 
geographic  locations  in  sweden  and  australia.  both  male  and 
female  participants  were  represented.  companies  were  selected 
through a random selection technique. the sample size was another 
threat to the external validity of this study. the small sample size in 
this study may affect the conclusions and hence we may not be able 
to generalize the results to the whole software engineering industry. 
the  timing  of  the  study  may  be  a  threat  to  external  validity. 
however,  this  study  is  based  on  data  from  already  completed 
(delivered or cancelled) software projects. another aspect is that the 
subject  latest  completed  software  projects  should  be  referred  to 
when answering the questions. this would minimize the threat that 
the software practitioners may have forgotten what really happened 
in the project. 
construct validity: this threat is concerned with issues related to 
the design of the study and social threats. this study was carefully 
designed,  with  the  design  being  piloted and a detailed analysis of 
constructs  such  as  different  definitions  of  projects  considered.  to 

towards 

their  attitude 

the  result  depending  on 

avoid  evaluation  apprehension,  complete  anonymity  from  other 
participants  and 
the  companies  was  guaranteed.  hypothesis 
guessing (where a participant tries to guess the hypothesis and then 
support 
the 
hypothesis)  can  mean  that  participants  introduce  bias  to  the 
collected data in this research. this is a threat to our study. another 
validity  threat  lies  in  the  question  that  asked  subjects  to  rank  and 
include  additional  factors  if  the  list  provided  to  them  was 
inadequate. subjects may have thought that it was easier to rank the 
provided  factors  than  propose  new  factors.  this  means  that 
important success factors may be missing.  
conclusion  validity:  threats  to  conclusion  validity  arise  from  a 
lack  of  statistical  calculations  or  misuse  of  statistical  assumptions 
that lead to incorrect conclusions by the researcher. there is a risk 
that conclusions from this study are inaccurate due to low statistical 
power.  no  statistical  calculations  are  used  to  find  patterns  in  the 
results. instead, deductive logic was used because of the limited data 
points in some categories. to obtain highly reliable measures and to 
avoid poor question wording and poor layout (which may introduce 
bias  into  the  collected  data,  confuse  the  participant  and  lead  to 
unsuitable answers) several pilot studies were conducted. to avoid 
threats from treatment implementation emailed questionnaires were 
used as often as possible. however, when the participant requested 
an interview, questions were asked in exactly the same way as they 
were asked in the questionnaire, reducing bias in the collected data. 
7.  conclusion 
this  research  set  out  to  investigate  software  project  and  product 
success factors in the australian and swedish software industries.  
generally speaking, our findings complement the results from other 
studies. that is, a well defined project scope, complete and accurate 
requirements, 
customer/user 
involvement  and  so  forth  are  perceived  as  contributing  to  project 
success.  similarly  adding  extra  personnel  to  meet  schedule 
estimations is perceived as contributing to the likelihood of project 
failure, which was also discussed in previous studies. 
our contribution is the discovery that there are differences in which 
factors  are  important  for  project/product  success  across  industries. 
this indicates that we need to take into account the industry type 
when  addressing  project/project  success  factors.  the  current 
definition of what factors are important for software project/product 
success does not consider what type of system is being developed 
(e.g.  a  simple  game,  a  life  saving  system,  nuclear  reactor  system 
etc.). nor does the definition consider whether the system is being 
developed  from  scratch  or  whether  the  project  merely  involves 
adding/updating the features and functionality of an already existing 
system. in summary, our findings indicate that software developers 
in  the  financial  services,  consulting,  and  telecommunications 
industries identify different factors as important for software project 
success. 
additional data is required to achieve more generalizable results. as 
previously discussed, a larger sample size and statistical calculations 
would  be  of  great  value.  in  addition,  studying  the  same  types  of 
projects from each industry will increase the validity of the results. 
future  studies  will 
investigation  of  software 
project/product  success  factors  for  various  customer  supplier 
relationships. 

estimations, 

schedule 

good 

involve 

the 

8.  acknowledgement 
we would like to thank all of the participants and their companies 
(both from sweden and australia) who have helped in making the 
data  collection  possible  for  this  research.  furthermore,  we  would 
like to thank irem sevinc for proofreading this paper and providing 
access to some of software companies in australia. 
9.  references 
[1]  babbie, e. the practice of social research, wadsworth, usa, 

2004. 

[2]  baccarini, d. the logical framework method for defining 

project success. project management journal, 30, 4 (dec. 
1999), 25-32. 

[3]  berntsson-svensson, r. successful software projects and 

products. master thesis, blekinge institute of technology, 
ronneby, sweden, 2006. 

[4]  brooks, f.p. the mythical man-month: essays on software 

engineering, addison wesley longman, united states of 
america, 1995. 

[5]  dahlberg, k., drew, n. and nystrom, m. reflective life world 

research, studentlitterature, lund, 2001. 

[6]  glass, r.l. editor's corner - software runaways - some 

surprising findings. journal of systems and software, 41, 2 
(may 1998), 75-77. 

[7]  gobeli, d.h., koenig, h.f., and bechinger i. managing 

conflict in software development teams: a multilevel analysis  
an examination and empirical developments. journal of 
product innovation management, 15, 5 (sep. 1998), 423-435. 

[8]  jones, c. patterns of large software systems: failure and 

success. computer, 28, 3 (mar. 1995), 86-87. 

[9]  kerzner, h. project management: a systems approach to 

planning, scheduling, and controlling, van nostrand 
reinhold, united states of america, 1995. 

[10] kotonya, g., and sommerville, i. requirements engineering  
processes and techniques, john wiley & sons ltd., uk, 1998. 

[11] lewis, j.p. project planning, scheduling, and control: a 
hands-on guide to bringing projects in on time and on 
budget, the mcgraw-hill companies, inc., usa, 2001. 

[12] linberg, k.r. software developer perceptions about software 
project failure: a case study. journal of systems and software, 
49, 2-3 (dec. 1999), 177-192. 

[13] nah, f.f-h., lau, j.l-s., kuang j. critical factors for 

successful implementation of enterprise systems. business 
process management journal, 7, 3 (jan. 2001), 285-296. 

 

[14] milis, k., and mercken, r. success factors regarding the 

implementation of ict investment projects. int. journal of 
production economics, 80, 1 (nov. 2002), 105-177. 

[15] pinkerton, w.j. project management: achieving project-

bottom line success, mcgraw hill, new york, 2003. 

[16] procaccino, j.d., verner, j.m., overmyer, s.p., and darter, 

m.e. case study: factors for early prediction of software 
development success. information and software technology, 
44, 1 (jan. 2002), 53-62. 

[17] procaccino, j.d., verner, j.m., shelfer, j.m., and gefen, d. 

what do software practitioners really think about project 
success: an exploratory study. journal of systems and 
software, 78, 2 (nov. 2005), 194-203. 

[18] standish group, chaos, http://www.standishgroup.com/ 

sample_research/chaos_1994_1.php (accessed feb 16, 2006). 

[19] standish group, chaos, http://www.standishgroup.com/ 

sample_research/pdfpages/chaos1999.pdf (accessed feb 16, 
2006). 

[20] standish group, chaos, http://standishgroup.com/ 

sample_research/pdfpages/extreme_chaos.pdf (accessed feb 
16, 2006). 

[21] sun, h. and wing, w.c. critical success factors from new 

product development in the hong kong toy industry. 
technovation, 25, 3 (mar. 2005), 293-303. 

[22] van der westhuizen, d. and fitzgerald, e.p. defining and 
measuring project success. in proceedings of the european 
conference on is management, leadership and governance 
(ecmlg05) (reading, uk, july 7-8, 2005). 

[23] verner, j.m. and cerpa, n. australian software development: 

what software project management practices lead to 
success? in proceedings of the 16th australian software 
engineering conference (aswec06) (brisbane, australia, 
march 29-april 1, 2005). ieee, 2005, 70-77. 

[24] verner, j.m., and evanco, w.m. in-house software 

development: what project management practices lead to 
success? ieee software, 22, 1 (jan-feb. 2005), 86-93. 

[25] wallin, c., larsson, s., ekdahl, f. and crnkovic, i. combining 
models for business decisions and software development. in 
proceedings of the 28th euromicro conference (dortmund, 
germany). ieee, 2002, 266-271. 

[26] wohlin, c., runeson, p., host, m., ohlsson, m.c., regnell, b., 
and wesslen, a. experimentation in software engineering: an 
introduction, kluwer academic publisher, usa, 2000. 

[27] yourdon, e. making death march projects pay off. 

datamation, 43, 4 (apr. 1997), 116-12 

 

