journal of software engineering and applications, 2013, 6, 59-64 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4236/jsea.2013.62010 published online february 2013 (http://www.scirp.org/journal/jsea) 

59

case study on critical success factors of running scrum* 
jiangping wan1,2 yahui zhu1 ming zeng1 
1school of business administration, south china university of technology, guangzhou, china; 2institute of emerging industrializa- 
tion development, south china university of technology, guangzhou, china. 
email: scutwjp@126.com, zhuyahui0819@qq.com, 987541400@qq.com 
 
received january 8th, 2013; revised february 6th, 2013; accepted february 14th, 2013 

 

abstract 
agile development 12 principles, and adaptive project management life cycle model are applied to case study of j group, 
the critical success factors of running scrum are identified as follows: 1) explicit the process of project management and 
a self-managing group with scrum; 2) professional agile development and release capability; 3) building learning or- 
ganization. j group as a pioneer scrum agile software development practices, realizes the productivity of significant 
promotion and cost reduction, accelerates the product to the market, improves customer satisfaction and achieves a 
more transparent development process and higher predictive capability. the study aims to improve the success rate of 
the running scrum. 
 
keywords: agile software development; scrum; critical success factors; case study 
1. introduction 
agile software development encourages the formation of 
collaborative and self-organization teams that will have a 
huge  competitive  advantage  over  those  who  hold  the 
view that a software development organization is nothing 
more than a pile of twisty little people all alike. a gelled 
software  team  is  the  most  powerful  software  develop- 
ment force there is. the agile manifesto is as follows: 1) 
individuals and interactions over processes and tools. 2) 
working software over comprehensive documentation. 3) 
customer collaboration over contract negotiation. 4) re- 
sponding to change over following a plan. twelve prin-
ciples  underlie  the  agile  manifesto,  including  1)  our 
highest priority is to satisfy the customer through early 
and  continuous  delivery  of  valuable  software.  2)  wel- 
come changing requirements, even late in development. 
agile processes harness change for the customers com- 
petitive  advantage.  3)  deliver  working  software  frequ- 
ently, from a couple of weeks to a couple of months, with 
a preference to the shorter timescale. 4) business people 
and developers must work together daily throughout the 
project. 5) build projects around motivated individuals. 
give them the environment and support they need, and 
trust them to get the job done. 6) the most efficient and 
effective method of conveying information to and within 
a  development  team  is  face-to-face  conversation.  7) 
working software is the primary measure of progress. 8) 

agile  processes  promote  sustainable  development.  9) 
the  sponsors,  developers,  and  users  should  be  able  to 
maintain  a  constant  pace  indefinitely.  10)  continuous 
attention  to  technical  excellence  and  good  design  en- 
hances agility. 11) simplicity. 12) the best architectures, 
requirements,  and  designs  emerge  from  self-organizing 
teams [1,2]. 
j group was found in 1980, which had created the first 
electronic medical record (emr) in 1985, its headquar- 
ter was located in toronto, canada. it has branch firms in 
american, france, india and china. shenzhen, as a main 
branch  of  the  research  and  development  headquarter, 
providing technical and business support for the whole 
group. j group is committed to the field of agile software 
development, especially in running scrum. j group has 
an  agile  development  team,  including  many  of  profes- 
sional consultants, all of them has more than 10 years 
work experience in it companies and the insightful un- 
derstanding  of  software  development,  project  manage- 
ment and other related fields. 
this paper is organized in the following: section 2 is 
literature review, including scrum framework, ten prin- 
ciples  of  knowledge  creation  in  open  source  software 
community and particular in resource capability arbitra- 
tion among multiple scrum teams. section 3 is research 
design. section 4 identifies critical success factors of run- 
ning scrum. section 5 is conclusions. 
2. literature review 
scrum is an innovative approach to getting work done. 
scrum  is  an  agile  framework  for  completing  complex 

*this research was supported by key project of guangdong province 
education  office.  (06jdxm63002),  nsf  of  china  (70471091),  and 
qualipso (ist-fp6-ip-034763). 

copyright  2013 scires.                                                                                 jsea 

60 

case study on critical success factors of running scrum 

projects.  scrum  originally  was  formalized  for  software 
development projects, but works well for any complex, 
innovative scope of work. the possibilities are endless. 
the scrum framework illustrated in figure 1 [3]. 
there  are  several  key  roles  in  scrum  framework:  1) 
stakeholders: the mission owners possess the idea about 
why to build, what to build, and how processes should be. 
2) product owner: the product development owner, close- 
ly working with stakeholders, creates a prioritized wish 
list-storycalled a product backlog. 3) scrum master: 
the facilitator, closely working with product owner, makes 
sure the stories in the product backlog will successfully 
delivered as workable sub-products. 4) scrum team: the 
developers, closely working with scrum master, deliver 
workable sub-products according to the product backlog. 
scrum master with the team invites the product owner 
to debrief the stories in product backlog. scrum master 
leads a sprint planning with the team to disassemble the 
story into tasks, a sprint backlog. it is a scrum team ef- 
fort to decide how to implement and who should do the 
tasks. daily-scrum is a group meeting to discuss the pro- 
gress of task implementation and technical issues. scrum 
master keeps the team focused on its goal. at the end of 
the sprint, the process of development, the work should 
be  potentially  shippable,  as  in  ready  to  hand  to  stake- 
holders. the sprint ends with a sprint review and retro- 
spective. as the next sprint begins, the team chooses an- 
other chunk of the product backlog and begins working 
again. the cycle repeats until enough items in the prod- 
uct backlog have been completed, the budget is depleted, 
or a deadline arrives. which of these milestones marks 
the end of the work is entirely specific to the project. no 
matter which impetus stops work, scrum ensures that the 
most valuable work has been completed when the project 
ends. 
j. p. wan and r. t. wang have discussed agile soft- 
ware process improvement in p company with their de- 
scription  of  process  management  in  current  level  and   
 

analysis of problems, design the p company critical suc- 
cess  factors  model  in  organizational  culture,  systems, 
products, customers, markets, leadership, technology and 
other  key  dimensions,  which  is  verified  with  question- 
naire in p company. they also apply knowledge creation 
theory to analyze the open source software community of 
successful application of the typical agile software me- 
thod,  propose  ten  principles  of  knowledge  creation  in 
open source software community: self-organizing, code 
sharing, adaptation, usability, sustention, talent, interac- 
tion, collaboration, happiness, and democracy [4]. 
rich  c.  lee  researched  the  following  questions:  1) 
what are the critical factors of success team communica- 
tion in running scrum? 2) how scrum master alleviates 
the challenge when team members lack of skills to com- 
plete  the  assigned  task?  3)  should  scrum  masters  ex- 
change  resources  for  specific  skill  required  tasks?  4) 
what  are  the  criterions  of  resource  exchange  among 
scrum teams? [5]. 
3. research design 
the resolution of the running scrum is put forward with 
the  deep  analyzing  of  the  various  factors  in  j  groups 
agile project and its challenges, resolution for the running 
scrum, including organization breakdown structure, ex- 
plicit the project management process, the self-managing 
of scrum team, professional agile development and re- 
lease, expending scrum  management, building learning 
organization,  and  then  analysis  the  effects  of  running 
scrum to confirm successful, including productive effi- 
ciency,  teamwork,  adaptability,  responsibility,  coopera- 
tion  ability,  then  the  key  processes  of  running  scrum, 
including  determinate  phase,  planning  phase,  start-up 
phase, supervision and control phase, decided to start the 
iteration  phase  and  closeout  phase,  finally  the  critical 
success factors in running scrum of j group are identified. 
the framework of research is illustrated in figure 2. 

figure 1. scru  framework. 

m 

 

copyright  2013 scires.                                                                                 jsea 

case study on critical success factors of running scrum 

 

figure 2. research framework. 

 
4. identify critical success factors of   

 

running scrum 

4.1. overview of running scrum in j group 
the decision-making committee of j group had a kick-off 
meeting of the scrum project at march 15, 2006, and set 
up the scrum transformed community, including the ex- 
perienced staffs of the engineering and development, the 
vice  presidents  of  the  product  management,  marketing, 
sales, operations and hr department, and the leaders of 
the  qa  department,  development,  architecture,  interac- 
tion  design  and  database.  about  15  people  joined  the 
community, in which the time of each one involved ran- 
ges from 8 to 24 months, it depends on their roles in the 
group and the periods of time they have promised. as the 
transformation affected all sections of the group, so the 
members we selected should on behalf of almost the en- 
tire group. the community has a two-hour meeting per 
week. 
4.2. solutions of running scrum in j group 
4.2.1. organization breakdown structure for   
the  scrum  team  of  j  group  consists  of scrum  master, 
product leader and team. scrum master, customers and 
management layer determine the candidate of the product 
manager together. scrum master is responsible for teach- 
ing  the  product  manager  how  to  work,  which  should 
learn to run the scrum in order to optimize the product 
development (figure 3). 
4.2.2. explicit the project management process 
for  the  success  of  the  project,  we  should  balance  the 
project  management  process  with  the  produce-oriented 
process. the same process should be selectively applied 
to  different  projects,  and  the  rational  using  should  be 
made depend on both the current situation and the dif- 
ference of the running project. 
4.2.3. the self-managing of scrum team 
as the scrum methods had all the inherent flexibility of 
the agile development, we could have the project team   

running scrum 

61

 

figure 3. the breakdown structure of j group. 

 
customized according to the different requirement. a few 
members of the agile team collected and distributed the 
key information before the daily team meeting. a simple 
dashboard for the other members is established, so that 
all the team members can quickly share their work in the 
daily meeting. no matter where are they, all the people 
can work properly. 
4.2.4. professional agile development and release 
j group follows the synchronizations and periodic stabi- 
lizations  strategy  in  development  and  the  releasing  of 
the new product [6]. it means all the work can be carried 
out paralleled and synchronized, in which many of the 
steps are incremental progressive and paralleled carried 
out,  and  need  coordination  and  running  in  automated. 
the unique of  the  j  group  is  the  ways of  the  running, 
which can support the incremental evolution of the pro- 
duct  characteristics  marketing  strategy,  and  each  team 
focus on finishing work as soon as possible, as well as 
providing a large number of customized products.   
j groups agile team usually adopts a mixed type de- 
velopment. using the traditional sequential steps at the 
beginning, once the first stage of the product characteris- 
tics finished, the team will turn to a frequent-build proc- 
ess, in order to keep synchronizations and periodic stabi- 
lizations in the evolution. the construction will be taken 
specific  measures  that  carrying  out  daily  synchronized 
debugging, providing customizes products and multiple 
platform version, centralized office, using a common lan- 
guage and the continuing testing. 
4.2.5. expending scrum management 
scrum development team usually has no more than 7 - 10 
members. this scale can finish a lot of tasks, especially 
in permitting and encouraging the use of agile develop- 
ment process. however, some special projects need the 
larger team.   
j  group  should  overcome  the  challenges  of  running 
scrum  in  large  and  multi-team  project,  including  ex- 
panding more product managers, finishing the backlog of 

copyright  2013 scires.                                                                                 jsea 

62 

case study on critical success factors of running scrum 

the  large-scale  products,  the  coordination  between  dif- 
ferent  teams,  the  synchronization  and  expansion  of  the 
sprint planning meeting. 
product  managers  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  running 
scrum.  for  a  small-size  team,  their  internal  task  is  to 
participate in the sprint planning meeting, review sprint 
meeting and daily meeting, manage the product backlog, 
solve the team problems and always keep online during 
the sprint. for the large-scale and multiple teams, their 
external task contains requirement analysis, carrying out 
the users investigate, participating in trade fairs, manag- 
ing the expectations of the project stakeholders, provid- 
ing  the  priority  of  the  product  backlog,  deciding  the 
prices, making the medium-and-long-term product strat- 
egy, observing the market trends and analyzing the com- 
petition. 
the multi-team project has different version, j group 
must  expand  the  product  managers.  many  large-scale 
project teams select commercial agile tools to support the 
backlog. all the tools should meet two principles as fol- 
lows: 1) if there is only one product, it should be only 
one backlog; 2) the scale of the backlog should be rea- 
sonable. 
when more than one team expanding, the coordination 
is very important. a common practice is scrum of scrum, 
these meeting allow teams to discuss their work, espe- 
cially in crossing and integrated data. 
when more than one team involves in the same scrum 
project, each team should manage its own sprint. over- 
lapping sprint would lead to many problems, because it 
is  impossible  that  all  the  teams  finish  their  tasks  at  a 
common time, and it is too difficult to deploy and pro- 
vide a complete systems feedback. therefore, synchro- 
nized sprint is necessary. it allows all teams start and end 
sprint in a day or two, and the length of sprint need not 
to be the exactly the same. 
4.2.6. building learning organization 
even if an operation does well for a enterprise, it is usu- 
ally not suitable for b enterprise. only through constant 
self-reflection, feedback and sharing can enterprises im- 
prove  themselves.  it  includes  systematic  review  and 
learning,  standardizing  measurement  and  timely  feed- 
back, customized consultant supervision and strengthen 
the communication among different teams. 
either the different departments of j group or the dif- 
ferent teams of the same product, the project experience 
and achievements of each team are different. at the end 
of the project, the team should finish the documents ana- 
lysis, which has a brief description of the development 
and testing, and summing up experience and lessons help 
the team to avoid the same  mistake in next project. in 
addition,  the  documents  also  conclude  team  members, 
product, quality description, progress and process, they 
are very important for sharing resources and experiences. 

scrum team leaders adopt some metrics to track and 
analyze the group. senior managers will use metric data 
to estimate resource requirements, schedule planning and 
the feedback of the stability and performance of the pro- 
ject. in general, these metrics include quality metrics; the 
number of the defects and their fixed rate; defect analysis 
report;  defect  rate  per  thousand  lines;  customers  satis- 
faction and feedback. 
systematic review and learning and standardizing 
measurement and timely feedback are the internal self- 
reflection of j group. learning from external customers 
is also important. j group adopts a customized consultant 
supervision,  which  means  extracting  a  consultant  from 
the  main  cooperators  to  participate  and  supervise  the 
crucial projects. enterprises should provide a variety of 
channels and opportunities to customers to feedback in- 
formation, and must have a customer service department 
to  analysis  and  classify  the  data  to  improve  the  data 
sources.   
j group establishes a series of communication mecha- 
nisms for cross product teams so that all the team could 
share  components  and  standardize  characteristics.  not 
only in reusing the design and code, but also each team 
committed to standard components and architecture. 
4.3. performance of running scrum in j group 
j group spent 8 months in investigating 50 scrum devel- 
opment projects in 2011, more than 600 people involved, 
the number of the teams adopting scrum was rapid in- 
creasing.  these  projects  are  engaged  in  the  scheduler, 
registration, billing, and service for millions of customers 
and  other  incremental  projects.  everyone  who  using 
scrum in j group once a quarter (including the owner of 
the product, developer, scrum master and managers) was 
investigated, and make a comparison with the previous 
development (table 1). 
4.4. identify the critical success factors of   

running scrum 

with the different phases of running scrum project case 
study,  particularly  in  running  j  groups  scrum  project, 
the key processes of the running scrum were explicitly 
summarized in table 2. 
 

table 1. the effect of the running scrum. 
 

increase greatly not change  decrease 

productive efficiency 

teamwork 
adaptability 
responsibility 

cooperation ability 

 

68% 
52% 
63% 
62% 
81% 

27% 
39% 
33% 
32% 
18% 

5% 
9% 
4% 
6% 
1% 

copyright  2013 scires.                                                                                 jsea 

case study on critical success factors of running scrum 

63

 

1. determinate phase 

1. develop the real requirements of   
customers;   
2. write a one page project description; 
3. recode the requirement of customers; 
4. gain the senior managers permission to 
run the project;   
5.  discuss  how  to  meet  the  requirements 
with the customers.   

4. supervision and control phase 
1. build the running and reporting system; 
2. report the schedule; 
3. supervise the running; 
4. deal with the request of scope change; 
5. supervise the risks; 
6. identify and solve the problems. 

 

table 2. the key processes of running scrum. 
2. planning phase 
1. define all the work of the project; 
2. establish the schedule of initial project; 
3. assess the time required to complete the project; 
4. analyze and adjust the project schedule; 
5. assess the resource required to complete the project; 
6. write the risk management plan; 
7. assess the whole cost of the project; 
8. record the project plan;   
9. sort the work in chronological order; 
10. get the senior managements permission to start the 
project. 
5. decided to start the iteration phase 
1. decision-making process for customer management; 
2. customers must be fully involved in this process; 
3. the atmosphere must be complete open and honest; 
4. determination must base on the expected commercial 
value; 
5. solution must be formed according to the projects 
goal. 

3. start-up phase 
1. recruit project manager;   
2. build the scope change management 
process;   
3. recruit the project team members; 
4. manage the team communication; 
5. write the descriptive document 
of project;   
6. determine the schedule; 
7. build the team operating rules;   
8. write the work package.   
6. closeout phase 

1. get the confirmation of the customer;
2. prepare for the deliverables 
and installations. 
3. write the closeout report; 
4. start the audit of the running. 

 
questionnaire survey was mainly carried in february 
2012 to march 2012 in shenzhen area between five com- 
panies with the e-mail. a total of send an email was 60, 
and  a  total  recovery  is  effective  questionnaire  was  40. 
effective recovery is 66%. tables 3-7 are respondent and 
survey unit, survey industry, customer party cooperation 
time  for  the  visited  enterprise,  agile  software  develop- 
ment history for the visited enterprise and the role of dis- 
tribution in project respectively. 
the  respondents  are  engaged  mainly  in  information 
and it industry, and service scale, the project cycle and 
individual  participation  in  scrum  experience  are  more 
average. respondents, which include scrum project man- 
agement four people, and a lot of really relate to a spe- 
cific scrum of team 22 engineers. it makes the data more 
convincing. 
with  case  study  on  the  key  processes  of  running 
scrum and referring the 12 principles of agile develop- 
ment and adaptive project management life cycle theory 
and model, in addition to survey, the critical success fac- 
tors of running scrum are identified as follows: 1) ex- 
plicit processes of project management and a self-man- 
aging group with scrum. 2) professional agile develop- 
ment  and  release  capacity  (work  synchronizations  and 
periodic stabilizations debug everyday, customize prod- 
uct and have lots of versions of product, work together, 
use the same development language), and expended sc- 
rum management (expended the manager of the product, 
finish  a  large  products  backlog  of  work,  work  and  co- 
ordination  each  other,  expend  the  sprint  meeting).  3) 
building learning organization (system analysis and stu- 
dies, measure standardization and feedback the thoughts, 
use  customer  adviser  and  improve  the  product,  streng- 
then the communization and sharing with different team). 

table 3. respondent and survey unit. 

enterprise survey 

p company 

i r&d division 

y it service, division 
c centre of network 

 

d company 

effective recovery 66% 

table 4. survey industry. 

industry 
it service 

electronic and information   

financial securities 
medical services 

interview 

(cid:151) 
(cid:151) 
(cid:151) 
(cid:151) 
(cid:151) 

% 

49.5% 
18.8% 
17.8% 
13.9% 

 
table  5.  customer  party  cooperation  time  for  the  visited 
enterprise. 

year 
<1   
1 - 3 
3 - 5 
>5 

% 

22.9% 
45.7% 
11.4% 
20% 

 
table 6. agile software development history for the visited 
enterprise. 

year 
1 - 3 
3 - 5 
>5 

% 

22.9% 
57.1% 
20% 

copyright  2013 scires.                                                                                 jsea 

64 

case study on critical success factors of running scrum 

table 7. the role of distribution in project. 
% 

role 

wen. 

references 

[1]  k. beck, m. beedle, et al., manifesto for agile software 

development, 2009. http://agilemanifesto.org/ 

[2]  l. williams, what agile teams think of agile princi- 
ples even after almost a dozen years, they still deliver 
solid  guidance  for  software  development  teams  and 
their projects, communications of acm, vol. 55, no. 4, 
2012, pp. 71-76. doi:10.1145/2133806.2133823 

[3]  p. deemer, g. benefield, c. larman and b. vodde, the 
scrum primer, 2013.   
http://www.brianidavidson.com/agile/docs/scrumprimer1
21.pdf 
j. p. wan and r. t. wang, empirical research on criti- 
cal success factors of agile software process improve- 
ment, journal of software engineering and applications, 
vol. 3, no. 12, 2010, pp. 1131-1140. 
doi:10.4236/jsea.2010.312132 

[4] 

[5]  r.  c.  lee,  the  success  factors  of  running  scrum:  a 
qualitative  perspective,  journal  of  software  engineer- 
ing and applications, vol. 5, no. 6, 2012, pp. 367-374. 
doi:10.4236/jsea.2012.56043 

[6]  m. a. cusumano and r. w. selby, microsoft secrets: 
how the worlds most powerful software company cre- 
ates technology, shapes markets and manages people, 
free press, new york, 1995. 

scrum master 
product principal 

developer 
designer 

tester & others 

11.4% 
62.9% 
8.6% 
2.9% 
14.2% 

5. conclusion 
with case study on j groups running scrum, it is found 
that enterprise should select and apply 12 principles of 
agile  development  reasonably,  and  improve  the  agile 
project  management  and  support  project  operation  ac- 
cording to adaptive project management life cycle model. 
we  try  to  illustrate  the  design  elements  of  the  project 
management processes and the crucial success factors of 
running scrums transformation. scrums transformation 
happens  in  different  departments,  different  places  and 
different time, if there is no a clear model or standardized 
process (adaptive project management life cycle) to as- 
sess the regular assessment, the success will be impossi- 
ble. it will provide a successful reference for other enter- 
prises. 
6. acknowledgements   
thanks for helpful discussion with mrs. panpan wang, 
mr. zhou zhijun, mr. jiangzhang li and mr. wang shu- 
 
 

 
 
 

copyright  2013 scires.                                                                                 jsea 

