 

accelerating 
academic  
research with  
cloud computing 

 
 
published: september 2014 
 
for the latest information, please see www.microsoft.com/education  
 

 

overview ................................................................................................................................................................. 1 

what is the cloud? ............................................................................................................................................. 1 

cloud service models .................................................................................................................................. 1 

public, private, hybrid clouds ................................................................................................................... 3 

cloud storage.................................................................................................................................................. 4 

microsoft azure .............................................................................................................................................. 4 

enabling next-generation research .......................................................................................................... 6 

support for cios ............................................................................................................................................ 6 

research as a service ................................................................................................................................... 7 

microsofts commitment to research .................................................................................................. 9 

conclusion ............................................................................................................................................................. 9 

resources ............................................................................................................................................................ 11 

 

 
 

accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

overview 

universities today face increasing demands and constraints from many directions. 
creating a successful academic research environment in this hyper-competitive and 
requirements-filled world requires powerful, efficient, and responsive systems. 

the cloud delivers flexibility, scalability, security, and cost savings, as well as the 
efficiency, responsiveness, and speed that principal investigators and post-doctoral 
researchers need to achieve an even higher level of productivity and innovation. 
university chief information officers (cios) and others responsible for delivering 
technologies that enable advanced research and science in higher education also benefit 
from cloud computing. 

 

what is the cloud? 

the cloud delivers on-demand computing resourceseverything from operating 
systems to applications to servers to massive storageover the internet on a pay-for-
use basis. software and data are hosted on remote computers in the cloud, and users 
connect through the internet via a browser or program interface from their own devices. 
servers are secured, deployed, maintained, and updated by expert staff. worries about 
data loss from disasters (natural disasters, flooding, power outages) are greatly reduced 
because data is automatically and securely protected and stored in the cloud designed 
for fast data recovery. universities no longer have to provide and maintain their own 
costly computing infrastructure on-premises. in both the private and public sectors, the 
cloud is dramatically changing the economics and time-to-value for it resources.  

cloud service models 

the cloud typically has three service models: infrastructure as a service (iaas), platform 
as a service (paas), and software as a service (saas). 

infrastructure as a service (iaas). the cloud provides the underlying infrastructure; the 
university controls the operating systems and deployed applications. iaas can be 
thought of as hardware as a service.  

platform as a service (paas). the cloud hosts applications or user-created applications 
and provides the infrastructure. the university controls the deployed applications. 
because the hardware and operational aspects of the cloud are managed by the cloud 
provider, applications can be developed quickly.  

software as a service (saas). the infrastructure (network, servers, operating system, 
storage) and applications are managed by the cloud provider, which also manages, 
maintains, and updates the system. applications run in the cloud. users access 
applications from a web browser or a program interface on their devices.  

1  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

compare cloud service  
models to on premises. 

 

 

each different cloud service comes with some overhead to it. its useful to compare 
using on-premises equipment with cloud services from microsoft azure: 

 

 

the microsoft azure cloud platform provides an open, flexible, global platform that 
supports multiple programming languages, tools, and frameworks. not limited to the 
windows platform, it also has the capability of including linux, python, java, hadoop, 
and the microsoft .net framework, and it can provide backend services to ios with 
azure mobile services. 

with microsoft azure and iaas, the university manages applications, data, runtime, 
middleware, and operating systems. microsoft deploys, maintains, and upgrades the rest, 
including virtualization, which enables the creation and management of virtual machines 
(vms).  

with paas, the university manages applications and data, and microsoft manages the 
rest. in this case, users may host their own websites optimized to run directly on 
microsoft azure with a vm operating system layer in between (resulting in better 
performance, less operating system management, and lower-cost computing). the 
increases in productivity can be considerable, and because the hardware and operational 
aspects of the cloud platform are also managed by microsoft, applications can be 
created and deployed quickly.  

with saas, users can take full advantage of the cloud, connecting via their browsers or 
program interfaces, leaving microsoft to manage all the underlying components.  

real innovation occurs in the algorithms and business logic that researchers develop to 
analyze their datathat is, at the top, or application, level. when researchers can invest 
more of their resources at this level, they have a better opportunity of delivering 
impactful outcomes and innovations from their research. because microsoft focuses on 
the platform, researchers are freed to focus on innovation at the application level.  

2  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

public, private, hybrid clouds 

a common misconception is that using the cloud is all or nothing. although cloud 
technology is becoming ubiquitous, microsoft azure can be configured in the way that 
best meets the universitys and researchers needs.  

 

 

 

choose the cloud 
configuration that 
meets your needs. 

 

private clouds take advantage of many of clouds efficiencies, while providing control of 
resources and restricting which organizations can use the same servers. private clouds 
can exist on- or off-premises for exclusive use by the university (and can be made 
accessible as appropriate to students, faculty, researchers, staff, and alumni). the 
infrastructure is owned and operated by a single provider that controls the way 
virtualized resources and automated services are customized and used.  

community clouds can exist on- or off-premises and are intended for exclusive use by a 
specific community that has shared concerns. for example, in the u.k., the ministry of 
education (moe) might operate a private cloud for all its universities. 

public clouds are owned and operated off-premises by companies that use them to 
offer academic institutions rapid access. with public cloud services, hardware, software, 
and the supporting infrastructure is owned and managed by providers. this can lower 
universities costs and management overhead, but the university has less control. 

 

 

3  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

hybrid clouds use a private cloud foundation combined with the strategic use of public 
cloud services. for example, some universities use private clouds, but manage workloads 
and store data across data centers, private clouds, and public cloudsthereby creating 
hybrid clouds. 

cloud storage 

research data requires vast, reliable, secure storage, and the cloud makes storing 
massive amounts of data feasible and cost-effective.  

on-premises storage with cloud backup stores everything on local machine hard drives 
at the university (or elsewhere), and backups are stored in the cloud and accessible if 
ever needed.  

with a hybrid on-premises and cloud data storage solution, critical data can be stored 
both on premises and on the cloud with microsoft azure, satisfying many disaster 
recovery requirements. because azure stores data redundantly (raid array), data is 
protected from hardware failure.  

with cloud-only storage, its true that data can be lost if the data center has a disaster. 
to remedy this, azure provides additional protection with the offer of geo-redundancy, 
which means that data is copied and stored in two widely separate data center locations, 
ensuring that any one disaster wont cause data loss.  

microsoft azure 

the following diagram illustrates the compute, data services, application services, and 
network services components of microsoft azure that enable researchers to build highly 
available, infinitely scalable applications and to quickly deploy and manage applications 
and services. azure manages the deployment details, such as provisioning and load 
balancing to health monitoring for continuous availability, enabling researchers to focus 
on the application and not on the infrastructure.  

4  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

 

  

 

5  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

microsoft azure 
components 

 

 

 

enabling next-generation 
research 

the cloud is changing higher education and is already enabling leading academic 
researchers to conduct groundbreaking research faster and more cost-effectively than 
ever before. principal investigators and post-doc researchers are able to provision 
supercomputing-magnitude resources quickly, access massive data sets, perform 
compute-intensive analyses, share data for collaboration, and share results for peer 
review and publishing. the cloud enables them to access massive technical resources 
rapidly and pay only for what they use.  

the cloud is fast, delivering speeds not available before. servers can be procured and 
provisioned within minutes instead of days or weeks. applications can be developed and 
deployed quickly, dramatically increasing the pace of innovation. the result is that less 
time and money are needed for technology and more time is available for core research.  

the cloud also provides real-time access to a broad set of tools, languages, and 
frameworks, delivering direct access to virtually unlimited computing resources. and 
because microsoft azure interoperates with linux, openstack, and more, and at the 
application level with ios, researchers can work with the tools theyre already familiar 
with and comfortable using.  

support for cios 

the role of university cio is evolving from being the gatekeeper of scarce it resources to 
the champion enabling leading-edge research by connecting researchers with the best 
next-generation technologies. gartner describes this evolving role for both the university 
cio and it organization:  

soon to be gone are the days when all solutions and other educational 
resources or services come fromor throughthe institutions or the 
school districts data center or infrastructure. time to deployment will 
decrease and become less dependent on the skill set or availability of it 
staff. its role will change from development and maintenance to 
customer relationship and vendor management.1 

 

university cios are strategic decision makers, shouldering the responsibility for 
delivering cost-effective computing resources, for securing data, and for meeting 
compliance and reporting requirements. they also work to advance the university by 
supporting and promoting vital research that benefits the university as well as society at 

                                                           
1 gartner, predicts 2014: technology drives education toward transformation, bill rust, allen 
weiner, marti harris, jan-martin lowendahl, terri-lynn b. thayer, 20 november 2013.  

6  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

large. they must be confident that data and services will be highly available and that 
data and confidential information will be protected, secure, and remain private. they 
must think about a wide range of issuesfrom scaling to security, to applications and 
virtual machines, to storage, data access, and sharing. 

universities benefit from the economy of scale that microsoft delivers, with its hundreds 
of thousands of servers in data center locations designed for efficiency and specifically 
located where land is inexpensive and power costs are low. expert data center staff 
perform upgrades and hardware replacements in bulk and manage deployment, 
maintenance, and security. cios can feel confident about the cloud because azure 
delivers 99.95% monthly availability (sla). no single university can come close to this 
scale, so costs are potentially lower with the cloud.  

 

 

 

microsoft has more 
than 100 data centers 
distributed globally.  

 

the cloud helps cios supplement the universitys infrastructure with secure, on-demand 
access to vast storage and supercomputing resources without any need for any 
additional investment in capital assets or it infrastructure, freeing up funding for new 
projects and priorities.  

research as a service 

researchers are increasingly burdened with demands for reporting and compliance as 
government and private funding agencies require them to make their data publicly 
available. years of using internal infrastructure tools and applications have often made it 
difficult for researchers to share data beyond the university.  

7  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

just as the cloud provides iaas, paas, and saas service models, microsoft adds a fourth 
cloud service model, research as a service (raas), which supports researchers in 
sharing data and meeting reporting requirements. 

researchers report that they can spend up to 90% of their time collecting and organizing 
data for analysis, including setting up servers and building applications that collect and 
organize data sets. when they have successfully collected their data sets, researchers 
then need to correlate data with prior research or to share data with collaborators 
around the world.  

with the cloud, researchers do not need to repetitively build everything from scratch or 
re-create data collection and data organization solutions. researchers can plug their 
data sources into an available prebuilt set of data collection and data organization 
solutions. their data sets can then plug into a data repository that supports easy 
correlation of their findings with other research data sets. sharing data and making data 
public is streamlined, advancing research and helping lead to increased innovation and 
practical application of results.  

for example, the wellcome trust in cambridge, england, researching the genetic causes 
of seven diseases (bipolar disease, coronary artery disease, hypertension, crohns 
disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and type i and type ii diabetes), uses microsoft azure for a 
genome-wide association study (gwas). the project involves searching for combinations 
of genomic information to gain insight into an individuals likelihood to develop one of 
these diseases.  

they need both massive storage and powerful computing capacity for their database 
containing genetic information from 2,000 people and a shared set of approximately 
13,000 controls for each of the seven diseases. they use the power of the cloud to not 
only store but also to analyze massive amounts of data. accelerated by microsoft azure, 
they are able to make faster breakthroughs in critical genetic research. for example, 
using a 27,000-core run on microsoft azure, the nodes were busy for 72 hours. during 
that time, 1 million tasks were completedequal to approximately 1.9 million compute 
hours. had the same process been run on a typical 8-core system, the computation 
would have taken 25 years.  

in this sort of research, its also essential that even distant relations be accounted for so 
that associations can be attributed to genes rather than to common ancestry. to 
overcome this confounding factor, microsoft research developed the factored 
spectrally transformed linear mixed model (fast-lmm), an algorithm that extends the 
ability to detect new biological relations by using data several orders of magnitude 
larger. fast-lmm enables much larger data sets to be used, which can result in more 
subtle signals in the data being detected.  

the wellcome trust has been able to analyze 63,524,915,020 pairs of genetic markers as 
they search for interactions among these markers for the seven targeted diseases. the 
new associations they are finding between the genome and these diseases can lead to 
potential breakthroughs in prevention and treatment.  

8  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

for more information, see fast-lmm and windows azure accelerate genetics research 
and supercomputing on demand with windows azure, which explain more about how 
microsoft azure is essential to this groundbreaking research.  

microsofts approach to supporting academic researchers (and the cios who support 
them) is quite simple:  
 

 

we help researchers do 
what they do best. 

 

microsofts commitment to research 

in addition to supporting university researchers with leading-edge technology, microsoft 
has also made a huge commitment to research with microsoft research, backed by more 
than $10.4b in funding (2013). the more than 125 microsoft research teams worldwide 
use microsoft azure cloud services in their own research, leading to innovations in 
computing, breakthroughs in social science research, powerful new products, and more. 

 

conclusion 

microsoft azure is the foundation for twenty-first century research and provides: 

  a global-scale data center foundation. data centers are distributed all around 

the world, and geo-redundancy for critical data and disaster recovery is 
available. 

 

virtualized, fault-tolerant computing. 

  highly secure, highly reliable (24/7x365, 99.95% availability) computing.  

9  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

 

 

  high energy efficiency. 

  a scalable platform for web data and analysis services. 

 

 

 

 

cost-effective storage, with 60 to 80% reduction in total cost of ownership 
(tco). 

services that support from a few up to millions of concurrent users. 

pay-by-use cost-effectiveness. 

simple purchase processby credit card or p.o., or work with a microsoft 
account executive to add it to your campus licensing agreement.   

 

microsoft azure 
worldwide 

 

cloud computing powers research and makes innovations possible. microsoft azure 
enables academic researchers to: 

  use the tools and technologies most relevant for them.  

  get cost-effective access to massive data storage and compute resources. 

for example, dna sequencing analysis research, which has the potential to lead 
to a wide range of medical breakthroughs, requires supercomputing resources 
and massive data storage. working through a grant provided by the national 
science foundation in partnership with microsoft, a team of computer scientists 
at virginia tech developed a cloud-computing model using the microsoft azure 
hdinsight service. by moving to an on-demand cloud computing model, 

10  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

researchers have easier, more cost-effective access to dna sequencing tools 
and resources, which may lead to even greater and faster advancements in 
medical research. 

  have global capabilities and compliance. microsoft azure makes it possible 

to share public data sets across the globe, which can facilitate large-scale 
collaboration. in places where infrastructure is poor, having massive data 
resources available on the cloud is especially valuable.  

many governments have strict privacy and security policy requirements for 
cloud infrastructure. to meet these various requirements, microsoft azure 
adheres to the highest standards. for example, microsoft azure is the only 
cloud platform that meets eu compliance standards.  

 

confidently store their data. because the cloud manages storage, less time 
and resources are required for storage infrastructure maintenance, and storage 
can scale seamlessly as needed. confidential and highly sensitive data is secure 
and data is protected with faster and proven data recovery capabilities. cios 
and researchers can feel confident, knowing that their data is automatically and 
secure and protected, and that it can be stored for the long term.  

resources 

training: microsoft offers free two-day technical training events. learn more, or sign up 
for training. 

webinars: one-hour webinars help researchers understand the value and capabilities of 
cloud computing and how they can use it for research in practical ways. participate in 
webinars as they happen, or view them later on demand. 

online training: videos provide a focused curriculum for scientists interested in using 
microsoft azure in their research. learn more. 

technical papers: covering a range of topicsincluding microsoft azure virtual 
machines (linux and windows), storage, websites, big data, hpc, microsoft business 
intelligence and other tools, and various open source toolsthese technical papers 
provide in-depth information that helps researchers get a fast start working with azure. 

microsoft azure for research projects: for the past several years, microsoft research 
has collaborated with researchers to experiment with cloud computing on microsoft 
azure. these pioneering projects have cut across disciplines, from bioinformatics to 
ecology, social network analysis, civil engineering, mobile computing, natural language 
processing, and more. view slides and information about some of these innovative and 
important projects. 

microsoft azure for research website 

 

 

 

11  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

 

 

 

the information contained in this document represents the current view of microsoft corporation on the issues 
discussed as of the date of publication. because microsoft must respond to changing market conditions, it should 
not be interpreted to be a commitment on the part of microsoft, and microsoft cannot guarantee the accuracy of 
any information presented after the date of publication. 

this white paper is for informational purposes only. microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, in this 
document. 

complying with all applicable copyright laws is the responsibility of the user. without limiting the rights under 
copyright, no part of this document may be reproduced, stored in, or introduced into a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), or for 
any purpose, without the express written permission of microsoft corporation. 

microsoft may have patents, patent applications, trademarks, copyrights, or other intellectual property rights 
covering subject matter in this document. except as expressly provided in any written license agreement from 
microsoft, the furnishing of this document does not give you any license to these patents, trademarks, copyrights, 
or other intellectual property. 

 2014 microsoft corporation. all rights reserved. 

microsoft, active directory, azure, hdinsight, visual studio, windows, and windows azure are either registered 
trademarks or trademarks of microsoft corporation in the united states and/or other countries. 

the names of actual companies and products mentioned herein may be the trademarks of their respective owners.  

 

this work is licensed under a creative commons attribution-noncommercial-noderivatives 4.0 
international license. 

 

 
12  accelerating academic research with cloud computing 

