communications

08/2013 vol.56 no.08

cacm.acm.org 

of the acm

evolutionary 
robotics

are we free to  
code the law?
building web apps  
for mobile devices
patient, heal thyself
is overt censorship  
a fatal mistake?
what is a flagship 
publication?

association for  
computing machinery

review articles

taking a biologically inspired approach to  
the design of autonomous, adaptive machines.

doi:10.1145/2493883

by josh c. bongard

evolutionary 
robotics

the automated design, construction, and deployment 
of autonomous and adaptive machines is an open 
problem. industrial robots are an example of 
autonomous yet nonadaptive machines: they execute 
the same sequence of actions repeatedly. conversely, 
unmanned drones are an example of adaptive yet 
non-autonomous machines: they exhibit the adaptive 
capabilities of their remote human operators. to date, 
the only force known to be capable of producing fully 
autonomous as well as adaptive machines is biological 
evolution. in the eld of evolutionary robotics,9 one 
class of population-based metaheuristicsevolutionary 
algorithmsare used to optimize some or all aspects of 
an autonomous robot. the use of metaheuristics sets 
this subeld of robotics apart from the mainstream 
of robotics research, in which machine learning 
algorithms are used to optimize the control policya of a 
robot. as in other branches of computer science the use 
of a metaheuristic algorithm has a cost and a benet. 
the cost is that it is not possible to guarantee if (or 
when) an optimal control policy will be found for a given 
robot. the benet is few assumptions must be made

a  a control policy is some function that transforms a robots sensor signals into  

commands sent to its motors.

74    communications of the acm   |  august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8

about  the  problem:  evolutionary  algo-
rithms  can  improve  both  the  parame-
ters and the architecture of the robots 
control  policy,  and  even  the  shape  of 
the robot itself.

because  the  trial-and-error  nature 
of  evolutionary  algorithms  requires  a 
large  number  of  evaluations  during 
optimization,  in  many  evolutionary 
robotics  experiments  optimization  is 
rst  carried  out  in  simulation.  typi-
cally an evolutionary algorithm gener-
ates populations of virtual robots that 
behave  within  a  physics-based  simu-
lation.b  each  robot  is  then  assigned 
a tness value based on the quality of 
its  behavior.  robots  with  low  tness 
are  deleted  while  the  robots  that  re-
main are copied and slightly modied 
in some random manner. the new ro-
bots are evaluated in the simulator and 
assigned a tness, and this cycle is re-
peated until some predetermined time 
period has elapsed. the most-t robot 
may then be manufactured as a physi-
cal  machine  and  deployed  to  perform 
its evolved behavior.

to illustrate the distinction between 
mainstream and evolutionary robotics, 
consider two experiments drawn from 
the  two  elds.  legged  locomotion

b  interested readers may download and perform 
their  own  evolutionary  robotics  experiments 
at http://www.uvm.edu/~ludobots.

  key insights

    manual design of a mobile robot  
that is autonomous and adaptive is  
extremely difcult.
    as an alternative, computers can evolve 
populations of robots in a simulator 
to exhibit useful behavior and then 
manufacture physical versions of the best 
ones, very much like how farmers breed 
crops for high yield. this approach is 
known as evolutionary robotics.
    this evolutionary approach changes 
the way we view robotics: rather than 
machine-learning techniques improving 
behaviors for a hand-designed robot, 
focus shifts to creating an evolutionary 
system that continuously designs and 
manufactures different robots with 
increasing abilities.

z
t
e
m

 

n
i
t
s
u
j

 

y
b

 

n
o
i
t
a
r
t
s
u
l
l
i

k
t

 

t
i
d
e
r
c

august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8  |  communications of the acm    75

review articles

optimizing a control policy that allows 
a two, four, or six-legged robot to move 
over rugged terrainis a popular area 
of study in robotics. in mainstream ro-
botics,  machine-learning  algorithms 
can now optimize walking behavior for 
a physical two-legged robot in a matter 
of minutes.7 alternatively, a recent in-
vestigation in simulation has shown if 
robots are evolved to move over rough 
terrain,  robots  will  eventually  evolve 
from  amorphous  shapes  into  robots 
exhibiting  the  rudiments  of  append-
ages (figure 1b).1

the former experiment can enable 
walking  behaviors  for  a  certain  kind 
of  robot;  the  latter  experiment  can 
continuously produce different robots 
adapted  to  different  environments. 
put  differently,  mainstream  robotics 
aims  to  continuously  generate  better 
behavior  for  a  given  robot,  while  the 
long-term  goal  of  evolutionary  robot-
ics is to create general, robot-generat-
ing algorithms.

history
the goal of articial intelligence, since 
its beginnings, has been to reproduce 
aspects  of  human  intelligence  (such 
as natural language processing or de-
ductive  reasoning)  in  computers.  in 
contrast, most roboticists aim to gen-
erate noncognitive yet adaptive behav-
ior in robots such as walking or object 
manipulation.  once  these  simpler 
behaviors  are  realized  successfully  in 
robots, it is hoped the behavior-gener-
ating algorithm will scale to generate 
ever more complex behavior until the 
adaptive behavior exhibited by a given 
robot  might  be  characterized  by  an 
observer  as  intelligent  behavior.  this 
operational  denition  of  intelligence 
bears  a  resemblance  to  the  turing 
test:  if  a  robot  looks  as  if  it  is  acting 
intelligently, then it is intelligent.

note  the  emphasis  in  robotics  on 
behavior: the action of a robot gen-
erates new sensory stimulation, which 
in turn affects its future actions. this 
differs  from  non-embodied  ai  al-
gorithms,  which  have  no  body  with 
which  to  affect,  or  be  affected  by  the 
environment. in non-embodied ai, in-
telligence is something that arises out 
of introspection; in robotics, the belief 
is that intelligence will arise out of ever 
more  complex  interactions  between 
the machine and its environment. this 

idea that intelligence is not just some-
thing contained within the brain of the 
animal or control policy of a robot but 
rather is something that emerges from 
the  interaction  between  brain,  body, 
and environment, is known as embod-
ied cognition.27

the very rst experiments in evolu-
tionary  robotics9  began  to  shed  light 
on  embodied  cognition.  in  one  set  of 
experiments  a  robot  equipped  with  a 
camera  had  to  move  toward  certain 
shapes and away from others. based on 
the way the robot evolved to move, the 
control  policy  of  the  robot  often  only 
made  use  of  two  small  pixel  patches 
rather than the entire video stream. in 
other words, the robot evolved the abil-
ity to recognize objects through a com-
bination of motion and sensation. this 
approach  is  non-intuitive  to  a  human 
designer,  who  might  implement  ob-
ject-recognition  algorithms  that  draw 
on all of the pixels in the video stream.

applications
evolutionary algorithms have been ap-
plied  in  several  branches  of  robotics 
and  thus  evolutionary  robotics  is  not 
strictly  a  subeld  of  robotics.  when 
applied  well,  an  evolutionary  ap-
proach can free the investigator from 
having to make decisions about every 
detail  of  the  robots  design.  in  many 
cases  the  evolutionary  algorithm  dis-
covers solutions the researcher might 
not  have  thought  of,  especially  for 
robots that are non-intuitive for a hu-
man to control or design. for example 
it is often difcult to see how best to 
control  a  soft  robot  (figure  1j)  using 
traditional  machine  learning  tech-
niques,  let  alone  determine  the  best 
combination of soft and rigid materi-
als for such a robot.

moreover,  ideas  can  ow  not  just 
from  biology  to  robotics  but  back 
again:  evolved  robots  that  exhibit 
traits  observed  in  naturesuch  as 
a  robot  swarm  that  evolves  coop-
erative  rather  than  competitive  ten-
denciesoften  provide  new  ways 
of  thinking  about  how  and  why  that 
trait  evolved  in  biological  popula-
tions. in this way evolutionary robot-
ics can give back to biology (why did 
this trait evolve?) or more cognitively 
oriented  elds  such  as  evolutionary 
psychology  (why  did  this  cognitive 
ability evolve?).

76    communications of the acm   |  august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8

evolutionary  biorobotics.  in  bioro-
botics,  investigators  implement  ana-
tomical details from a specic animal 
in hardware and then use the resulting 
robot  as  a  physical  model  of  the  ani-
mal under study. although much work 
in this area has been dedicated to non-
human  animals  (see  supplemental 
material  available  in  the  acm  digital 
library;  http://dl.acm.org),  many  ro-
boticists  choose  to  model  the  human 
animal:  a  humanoid  robot  is  more 
likely to be able to reach a doorknob, 
climb  steps,  or  drive  a  vehicle  than  a 
wheeled robot or one measuring only 
a few inches in length. the humanoid 
form,  however,  requires  mastery  of 
bipedal locomotion, a notoriously dif-
cult task. as an example, reil et al.30 
evolved a bipedal robot in simulation 
that  rst  mastered  walking  and  then 
evolved  the  ability  to  walk  toward  a 
sound source.

evolutionary  biorobotics 

in  short,  bioroboticists  attempt  to 
model, in robot form, the products of 
evolution:  individual  organisms.  evo-
lutionary  roboticists  in  contrast  at-
tempt to re-create the process of evolu-
tion, which generates robots that may 
or may not resemble existing animals.
is  a 
blend of these two approaches: inves-
tigators  build  robots  that  resemble 
a  particular  animal,  and  then  evolve 
one  aspect  of  the  robots  anatomy 
to  investigate  how  the  correspond-
ing  aspect  in  the  animal  might  have 
evolved.  for  example  long  and  his 
colleagues19  have  evolved  the  stiff-
ness  of  articial  tails  attached  to 
swimming  robots:  robots  with  tails 
of  differing  stiffness  have  differing 
abilities  to  swim  fast  or  turn  well. 
this  provides  a  unique  experimental 
tool for investigating how backbones 
originally evolved in early vertebrates.
developmental robotics. the eld of 
developmental robotics22 shares much 
in  common  with  evolutionary  robot-
ics. practitioners of developmental ro-
botics  draw  inspiration  from  develop-
mental psychology and developmental 
neuroscience:  how  do  infants  gradu-
ally  mature  into  increasingly  complex 
and capable adults? like evolutionary 
robotics, work in developmental robot-
ics  tends  to  have  either  a  scientic  or 
an engineering aim. developing robots 
can be used as scientic tools: they can 
serve as physical models for investigat-

the evolution  
of robot bodies 
and brains differs 
markedly from  
all other 
approaches 
to robotics in 
that it does not 
presuppose  
the existence of  
a physical robot.

ing  biological  development.  alterna-
tively,  engineers  can  draw  on  insights 
from  biological  development  to  build 
better robots.

evo-devo-robo.  developmental  ro-
botics  tends  to  focus  on  post-natal 
change to a robots body and brain 
as the robot learns to master a particu-
lar  skill.  evolutionary  robotics  experi-
ments on the other hand generate ro-
bots that become more complex from 
generation to generation, but typically 
each individual robot maintains a xed 
form while it behaves.

biological  systems  however  exhibit 
change  over  multiple  time  scales:  in-
dividual organisms grow from infants 
into  adults,  and  the  developmental 
program  that  guides  this  change  is  in 
turn  altered  over  evolutionary  time. 
this process is known as the evolution 
of development, or evo-devo. this bio-
logical phenomenon has recently been 
exploited  in  evolutionary  robotics:3  at 
the outset of evolution, robots change 
from  a  crawling  worm  into  a  legged 
walking machine over their lifetime. as 
evolution proceeds, this infant form is 
gradually lost until, at the end of evolu-
tion, legged robots exhibit the ability to 
walk  successfully  without  the  need  to 
crawl rst. it was found this approach 
could  evolve  walking  machines  faster 
than a similar approach that does not 
lead robots through a crawling stage.

in  the  initial  experiments  of  evo-
devo-robo,34  the  genetic  instructions 
were  encoded  as  a  specific  class  of 
formal  grammars  known  as  linden-
mayer  systems,  or  l-systems.c  l-sys-
tems  were  initially  devised  to  model 
plant  growth:  their  recursive  nature 
can  produce  fractal  or  otherwise 
forms.  hornby12  dem-
symmetric 
onstrated  that  robots  evolved  using 
such  grammars  do  indeed  produce 
repeated  forms  (figure  1a).  he  also 
showed  this  repetition  can  make  it 
easier for evolutionary algorithms to 
improve  such  robots,  compared  to 
robots  lacking  in  genetically  deter-
mined self-similarity.

the  evolution  of  robot  bodies 
and  brains  differs  markedly  from  all 
other  approaches  to  robotics  in  that 
it  does  not  presuppose  the  existence 

c  sims work had a large impact on the comput-
er graphics community and l-systems remain 
a popular technique within that eld.

review articles

of  a  physical  robot.  rather,  the  user 
provides  as  input  a  metric  for  mea-
suring robot performance along with 
a simulation of the robots task envi-
ronment, and the algorithm produces 
as  output  the  body  plan  and  control 
policy for a robot capable of perform-
ing  the  task.  this  can  then  be  used 
to  manufacture  a  physical  version  of 
the evolved robot. such an algorithm 
could,  in  principle,  continually  re-
ceive new desired behaviors and task 
environments  and  continuously  gen-
erate novel robots.

in this way, the roboticist can make 
fewer  assumptions  about  the  nal 
form  of  the  robot  and  have  greater 
condence  the  nal  evolved  robot  is 
better adapted to the environment in 
which  it  must  operate.  for  example, 
there is often a debate about whether 
a wheeled or legged robot is more ap-
propriate for moving over a given sur-
face. although not yet demonstrated, 
an  evolutionary  robotics  algorithm 
should  generate  wheeled  robots  if 
supplied with a simulation of at ter-
rain  and  legged  robots  if  supplied 
with  a  simulation  of  rugged  terrain. 
recent  work  in  mainstream  robotics 
has demonstrated the possible advan-
tage of combining wheels and legs in 
the  same  robot:  an  evolutionary  sys-
tem  should  rediscover  this  manually 
devised  solution  if  it  is  indeed  supe-
rior to either wheels or legs alone.

another  advantage  of  this  ap-
proach  over  mainstream  robotics  is 
its  potential  for  better  scalability:  by 
genetically  encoding  assembly  in-
structions  rather  than  the  blueprint 
of  a  robot,  more  complex  machines 
can  be  evolved  with  little  or  no  in-
crease  in  the  amount  of  information 
encoded in the genome. for example, 
consider  an  approach  in  which  ro-
bots  are  specied  by  a  formal  gram-
mar  such  that  the  invocation  of  a 
rewrite  rule  replaces  one  part  of  the 
robot  with  two  or  more  parts.  thus 
the more times a given set of rewrite 
rules  are  invoked,  the  more  complex 
the resulting robot becomes. if evolu-
tion  increases  the  number  of  rewrite 
rule  invocations,  then  simple  robots 
can evolve into more complex robots 
with  no  increase  in  the  information 
content  of  the  underlying  genomes 
describing those robots.

despite  the  promise  of  this  ap-

august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8  |  communications of the acm    77

review articles

figure 1. a sampling of representative work in evolutionary robotics.

evolutionary robotics often involves optimizing 
not only the controller of a robot but also its 
body plan. formal grammars (a12) and algo-
rithms that simulate development (b1) have 
been used to optimize robots in simulation. 
additive manufacturing has been employed to 
build physical versions of evolved simu-
lated robots semiautomatically (c,d18). once 
deployed as physical machines, evolutionary 
algorithms have been used to allow damaged 
robots to recover from injury (e4) as well as 
ease the transferral of newly evolved control-
lers from simulation to the physical robot (f16). 
in addition to locomotion, researchers have 
evolved more cognitively demanding behaviors 
such as discriminating between differently 
shaped objects by manipulating them (g35) or 
physically demanding tasks like aerial swarm-
ing (h11). behaviors have also been evolved for 
robots with non-traditional body plans such as 
tensegrity robots (i;26 robot built by s. fivat), 
(b) auberbach and bongard1 
(a) hornby and pollack12
soft robots (j32), modular robots (k39) and robot 
swarms (l33).

(a) hornby and pollack12

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(a) hornby and pollack12

(a) hornby and pollack12

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(a) hornby and pollack12
bongard et al.4

bongard et al.4

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(f) loos et al.16

(f) loos et al.16

bongard et al.4

bongard et al.4

(f) loos et al.16

(f) loos et al.16

(a) hornby and pollack12
(a) hornby and pollack12

(a) hornby and pollack12

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(b) auberbach and bongard1 
(b) auberbach and bongard1

(c)

(c)

(a) hornby and pollack12

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(a) hornby and pollack12

(c)
(c)

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(c)
the golem project
the golem project lipson and pollack18
  lipson and pollack18

(d)
the golem project
  lipson and pollack18

(d)
(d)

(c)

the golem project
  lipson and pollack18

(d)

(a) hornby and pollack12

bongard et al.4

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(f) loos et al.16

(c)

(g) tuci et al.35

bongard et al.4
(c)

(c)

the golem project
  lipson and pollack18

the golem project
  lipson and pollack18

(d)

(f) loos et al.16

(d)

(g) tuci et al.35

(e) bongard et al.4

bongard et al.4

bongard et al.4

(a) hornby and pollack12

(b) auberbach and bongard1 

(f) loos et al.16

(f) loos et al.16
(c)

(f) loos et al.16

(g) tuci et al.35

(h) hauert et al.11

the golem project
  lipson and pollack18

(g) tuci et al.35
(d)

(g) tuci et al.35

(c)

(g) tuci et al.35

the golem project
  lipson and pollack18

(i) paul et al.26

(h) hauert et al.11

(d)
(h) hauert et al.11
(j) rieffel et al.32

(k) yim et al.39

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

bongard et al.4

(f) loos et al.16

(g) tuci et al.35

(i) paul et al.26

(i) paul et al.26

(g) tuci et al.35

(g) tuci et al.35

bongard et al.4

(g) tuci et al.35

(j) rieffel et al.32

(j) rieffel et al.32

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.
(k) yim et al.39

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

(l) rubentstein et al.33
(k) yim et al.39

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

(h) hauert et al.11

(f) loos et al.16

(h) hauert et al.11
figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

(h) hauert et al.11
(h) hauert et al.11
figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

(g) tuci et al.35

(i) paul et al.26

(i) paul et al.26

(j) rieffel et al.32

(j) rieffel et al.32

bongard et al.4

(f) loos et al.16

(k) yim et al.39

(k) yim et al.39

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

(g) tuci et al.35

(i) paul et al.26

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

(i) paul et al.26

(i) paul et al.2

(i) paul et al.26

(i) paul et al.26

(i) paul et al.26

(j) rieffel et al.32

(j) rieffel et al.32

(k) yim et al.39
(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

(k) yim et al.39
(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

(j) rieffel et al.32

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

(k) yim et al.39

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

(l) rubentstein et al.33

(l) rubentstein et al.33

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

(j) rieffel et al.32

(h) hauert et al.11
(j) rieffel et al.32

(k) yim et al.39

(j) rieffel et al.32

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

(l) rubentstein et al.33

(k) yim et al.39

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.
(l) rubentstein et al.33

(l) rubentstein et al.33

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

(i) paul et al.26

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.
figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

(j) rieffel et al.32

(k) yim et al.39 
(k) yim et al.39
(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

(usc polymorphic robotic lab)

(l) rubentstein et al.33

(l) rubentstein et al.33

78    communications of the acm   |  august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8

figure 1c,d,f,g,j,k,l reprinted courtesy of ieee.

figure 1e reprinted courtesy of aaas. 
figure 1h reprinted courtesy of springer.

review articles

proach,  only  a  handful  of  such  al-
gorithms  have  yet  been  developed. 
there  are  ve  main  reasons  for  this. 
first,  implementing  such  an  algo-
rithm  is  extremely  difcult,  as  it  re-
quires  a  robust  physics-based  simu-
lator  that  can  accurately  simulate 
complex  mechanical  constructs  of 
arbitrary topology. second, even with 
todays  available  computing  power  it 
can  be  computationally  prohibitive 
to evaluate the thousands or millions 
of  candidate  robots  required  to  gen-
erate one of sufcient quality. third, 
an  evolutionary  algorithm  must  be 
devised  that  is  expressive  enough  to 
encode diverse robot forms and evolv-
able in the sense that successive slight 
mutations  lead  to  successively  more 
complex and capable robots. fourth, 
building  a  physical  copy  of  the  often 
complex  virtual  robots  produced  by 
such systems can be prohibitive. and 
nally,  such  systems  have  yet  to  au-
tomatically  generate  a  robot  that  is 
more complex and capable than those 
designed  and  built  manually.  over-
coming  these  challenges  remains  a 
strong focus in the eld.

swarm  robotics.  one  of  the  major 
challenges in swarm robotics is devis-
ing a control policy that, when execut-
ed by all members of the swarm, gives 
rise  to  some  desired  global  behavior 
(figure 1l). for example, if one wishes 
to program a group of robots to move 
collectively in a way similar to biologi-
cal  herds,  ocks,  or  schools  of  sh,  it 
has been shown31 that each robot must 
balance  attraction  toward  its  local 
neighbors  with  repulsion  away  from 
neighbors that are too close.d however, 
if attraction is weighted too heavily, the 
swarm can contract into a trafc jam; if 
repulsion is weighted too strongly the 
group disperses.

this approach to controlling groups 
of robots is based on the principle of 
self-organization  observed  at  many 
levels of biological systems: biological 
elements  such  as  cells  or  organisms 
often  form  into  cohesive  patterns 
without a central control signal. this 
approach  is  desirable  in  robotics,  in 
which  communication  limitations  or 

d  this  basic  algorithm  has  since  become  the 
cornerstone of computer graphics algorithms 
which  simulate  the  movement  of  animal  or 
human groups.

the danger of failure may make desig-
nating one robot as the leader a dif-
cult or risky proposition.

evolutionary approaches have been 
used to optimize individual behaviors 
within a robot swarm. in the rst such 
work,29  control  policies  for  homoge-
neous  robots  evolved  that  allowed 
them  to  move  in  concert,  despite  the 
lack of a leader. repeatedly evaluating 
large  numbers  of  candidate  control-
lers on groups of physical robots plac-
es severe demands on the underlying 
hardware,  so  much  work  in  this  area 
has  relied  on  simulations  of  robot 
swarms. this has enabled researchers 
to investigate more complex group be-
haviors, such as group hunting.20 such 
experiments  require  an  understand-
ing  of  co-evolution:  one  groups  abil-
ity to overcome a second group makes 
it  likely  the  second  group  will  evolve 
to  defend  against  the  original  group. 
this  in  turn  exerts  pressure  for  the 
original  group  to  evolve  a  new  strat-
egy, and so on.

co-evolution requires competition 
between groups, but also cooperation 
between  individual  group  members. 
evolutionary  robotics  has  been  used 
to  investigate  the  conditions  under 
which cooperation will arise, and how 
communication  may  evolve  to  sup-
port it. in an early study communica-
tion evolved in groups of male and 
female  simulated  robots  so  that 
female  robots  could  call  out  to  and 
attract males for mating.36 it was ob-
served  that  different  dialects  would 
evolve and compete with one another. 
more recent work with populations of 
simulated  robots  has  demonstrated 
how  distinct  communication  strate-
gies can arise and that there are evolu-
tionary  advantages  to  more  complex 
strategies.38  these  and  other  studies 
may  provide  unique  tools  for  study-
ing  the  evolution  of  biological  com-
munication strategies in general, and 
human  language  in  particular.  such 
work  could  also  provide  a  physical 
substrate on which to test hypotheses 
from game theory that involve decep-
tion, cooperation, and competition.

modular  robotics.  advancing  tech-
nology  has  now  made  modular  ro-
botics  feasible:  individual  robots,  or 
modules, may dynamically attach and 
detach  from  one  another  to  create  a 
robot with a constantly changing form 

(figure  1k).  it  has  been  shown  that 
evolutionary  algorithms  can  be  used 
to  optimize  behaviors  for  a  modular 
robot in a xed form (for example, see 
zahadat40).  more  recently  evolution-
ary methods have been used to enable 
modular robots to self-assemble from 
their  constituent  parts  or  recongure 
into  different  functional  forms  (for 
example,  see  meng23).  continuously 
evolving  novel  forms  and  associated 
behaviors  appropriate  for  a  newly  en-
countered  environment  remains  an 
open problem in this area.

soft robotics. with the exception of 
wheeled  vehicles,  robots  are  typically 
constructed  from  jointed  collections 
of  rigid  parts,  mirroring  the  skeletal 
linkages  of  higher  animals  and  hu-
mans. advances in materials science, 
however,  have  made  non-traditional 
robot  body  plans  possible.  as  one 
example,  the  evolution  of  behaviors 
for  tensegrity  robots  was  reported  in 
paul26  (figure  1i).  tensegrity  struc-
tures are collections of rigid and elas-
tic  links  attached  in  a  particular  way 
that  provide  several  advantages  over 
traditional robots, such as the ability 
to automatically revert to their default 
form if perturbed.

soft  robots  are  emerging  as  a  new 
class  of  machine  that  combines  dis-
crete  rigid  parts  with  continuous, 
soft  materials  (figure  1j).  such  ma-
chines could squeeze through holes, 
climb  up  walls,  and  ow  around  ob-
stacles.32 controlling such devices is 
non-trivial, as motion at one location 
of the robot can propagate in unantic-
ipated ways to other parts of the body. 
despite  this,  rieffel  et  al.32  success-
fully evolved locomotion for a soft ro-
bot such that it exploited rather than 
fought  against  the  synergies  within 
its body. evolving the architectures of 
such discrete and continuous devices 
demands  new  kinds  of  optimization 
methods.  coupled  with  the  sudden 
recent interest in this eld13 there are 
many  contributions  that  computer 
scientists  interested  in  optimization 
could make in this area.

formalisms
evolutionary  robotics  is  a  mostly 
empirical  endeavor,  although  three 
formalismsthe  nature  of  computa-
tion,  dynamical  systems  theory,  and 
information theoryare beginning to 

august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8  |  communications of the acm    79

review articles

provide  a  theoretical  foundation  for 
the eld.

morphological  computation.  as 
noted  earlier,  evolutionary  robotics 
builds  on  the  concept  of  embodied 
cognition,  which  holds  that  intelli-
gent  behavior  arises  out  of  interac-
tions  between  brain,  body,  and  en-
vironment.27 an important corollary 
of embodied cognition is that, given 
the right body plan, a robot (or ani-
mal)  can  achieve  a  given  task  with 
less  control  complexity  than  an-
other  robot  with  an  inappropriate 
body  plan.  for  example,  a  soft  ro-
bot hand can grip a complex object 
simply  by  enclosing  it:  the  inner 
surface  of  the  hand  passively  con-
forms  to  the  object.  a  robot  hand 
composed  of  hard  material  must 
carefully  compute  how  to  grasp  the 
object.  it  has  been  argued  that  the 
physical aspect of a robotits mor-
phologycan actually perform com-
putations that would otherwise have 
to be performed by the robots con-
trol  policy  if  situated  in  an  unsuit-
able  body  plan.  this  phenomenon 
computation25 
of  morphological 
cannot  be  completely  abstracted 
away from the physical substrate that 
gives rise to it in the way a turing ma-
chine  can.  practitioners  in  this  area 
would  greatly  benefit  from  the  aid 
of theoretical computer scientists to 
formalize this concept.

dynamical systems theory. dynam-
ical  systems  theory  is  increasingly  a 
useful  tool  for  creating  controllers 
for  autonomous  robots.2  often  these 
controllers  take  the  form  of  articial 
neural  networks  that  have  their  own 
intrinsic dynamics: they exhibit com-
plex  temporal  patterns  spontaneous-
ly.  evolutionary  algorithms  can  then 
be  used  to  shape  the  parameters  of 
these networks such that they can be 
pushed by incoming sensor stimuli to 
fall  into  desired  attractor  states.  for 
example,  a  neural  network  that  falls 
into  a  periodic  attractor  may  gener-
ate a rhythmic gait in a legged robot. 
however,  it  has  been  demonstrated 
that a one-to-one mapping between a 
basin of attraction in a neural network 
and  a  distinct  robot  behavior  may  be 
overly simplistic,14 indicating there is 
much work to be done at the interface 
of dynamical systems theory and evo-
lutionary robotics.

information theory. typically in an 
evolutionary  robotics  experiment,  the 
tness of a robot is measured based 
on  its  ability  to  perform  a  given  be-
havior, such as how far it can walk or 
how  well  it  can  grasp  an  object.  sur-
prisingly, it has been found that maxi-
mizing  certain  information-theoretic 
measures  within  the  neural  network 
of  evolving  robots  can  lead  to  useful 
behavior.28  why  information  maxi-
mization  produces  desired  behaviors 
rather than useless, random, or unin-
teresting behavior remains mostly un-
resolved, although some progress has 
been made in this direction.8

in addition to helping with the syn-
thesis of behavior, information theory 
can also be used to analyze evolved be-
haviors.  williams  et  al.  have  recently 
shown37  that  information  owthe 
transfer of information from one vari-
able  to  anothercan  be  employed 
to  measure  how  behaving  robots 
ofoad  computed  information  to 
their  body  and/or  their  environment. 
this  technique  therefore  holds  prom-
ise for formalizing the concept of mor-
phological computation.25

challenges
there are a number of challenges cur-
rently facing the eld, including trans-
ferring  evolved  robots  from  simula-
tion  to  physical  machines;  scalability 
issues;  and  the  difculty  of  dening 
appropriate tness functions for auto-
matically measuring behavior.

the  reality  gap  problem.  both 
biological and articial evolution are 
notorious  for  exploiting  the  poten-
tial  relationship  between  the  animal 
(or  robot)  and  its  environment  to 
produce  new  behaviors.  for  instance 
the  lightweight  property  of  feathers, 
which  are  thought  to  have  originally 
evolved for heat regulation, was later 
exploited for ight.e

as  an  example  of  the  exploitative 
tendencies  of  evolutionary  algo-
rithms applied to robots, a robot was 
initially  designed  to  brachiate  along 
a  suspended  beam.10  the  robot  was 
composed  of  a  main  body  slung  un-
der two arms, and a heavy battery pack 
attached to the main body. gradually, 
the evolutionary algorithm discovered 

e  this tendency of evolution to repurpose traits 

is known as exaptation.

80    communications of the acm   |  august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8

control policies for the robot that ex-
ploited,  rather  than  fought  against 
the weight of the batteries. these con-
trol policies would cause the robot to 
move such that the battery pack swung 
forward under the robots body before 
it  changed  hand  holds.  this  would 
cause  the  robots  center  of  mass  to 
move  forward,  thus  requiring  much 
less  force  to  release  contact  with  the 
beam  and  grasp  it  further  forward. 
this mimics the way primates exploit 
the weight of their bodies like a pen-
dulum  to  bring  them  into  reach  of  a 
new  tree  limb.  it  is  also  reminiscent 
of  the  energy-saving  passive  dynam-
ics  of  bipedal  locomotion  (see  more 
details in the supplemental material).
however, if robots are optimized in 
a  simulator,  articial  evolution  may 
exploit  simplications  or  inaccura-
cies in how physics is simulated. such 
evolved control policies may then fail 
to  reproduce  the  desired  behavior 
when  transferred  from  simulated  to 
physical robots. for example, if there 
is no noise in the simulator, a control 
policy may evolve to generate behavior 
based  on  a  very  narrow  range  of  sen-
sor values. if this control policy is then 
transferred to a physical robot with a 
sensor that registers a wider range of 
values  due  to  limitations  in  its  elec-
tronics or mechanics, the physical ro-
bot may not behave as intended. this 
failure  of  evolved  solutions  to  cross 
the gap from simulation to reality is 
known  as  the  reality  gap  problem15 
and  is  one  of  the  major  challenges 
facing  the  eld.  however,  a  number 
of  solutions  have  been  proposed  and 
signicant progress is being made in 
this area.

in early work, sampling of the physi-
cal  sensors  was  conducted  and  used 
to simulate the robots sensors during 
evolution.24 alternatively, noise can be 
added to different aspects of the robot 
and  its  interaction  with  the  environ-
ment:  noise  can  be  added  to  the  sen-
sors, to the effects of the motors, or the 
position of the robot itself.15 this keeps 
evolution  from  exploiting  artifacts  of 
the simulation.

however, neither of these approach-
es scale well. if the robot must interact 
with  increasingly  complex  and  asym-
metric  objects,  more  samples  must 
be taken from the sensors that detect 
the object: the sensor must be polled 

it was identied 
early on that the 
time required to 
evaluate a single 
robot might grow 
exponentially with 
the number of 
parameters used 
to describe its task 
environment.

at many more distances and positions 
relative to the object because there are 
more unique views of the object from 
the  standpoint  of  the  sensor.  if  noise 
is  added  to  the  simulation,  each  con-
trol  policy  must  be  evaluated  several 
times  such  that  controllers  evolve  to 
be  robust  to  the  noise  in  the  simula-
tion.  for  more  complex  robots,  noise 
must be added to greater numbers and 
types of sensors and actuators. this re-
quires even more evaluations to evolve 
robustness against this larger number 
of noise sources.

in  more  recent  work  the  typically 
unidirectional  approach  of  transfer-
ring evolved control policies from sim-
ulated to physical machines has been 
replaced with bidirectional approach-
es  in  which  optimization  alternates 
between simulation and reality.4,16 for 
example,  in  bongard  et  al.4  three  dif-
ferent  evolutionary  algorithms  were 
employed. the rst optimized a popu-
lation of physical simulators to better 
reect reality: the tness of a simula-
tor was dened as its ability to predict 
the  behavior  of  the  physical  robot 
(figure 1e).

the second evolutionary algorithm 
optimized  exploratory  behaviors  for 
the  physical  machine  to  perform. 
these behaviors were assigned a high 
tness if, when executed by the physi-
cal machine, they extracted the most 
new  information  about  the  way  in 
which the robot could interact with its 
environment.  this  new  information 
then became new training data for the 
rst evolutionary algorithm. gradual-
ly,  after  several  alternations  between 
these  two  optimization  methods,  a 
physical  simulation  would  automati-
cally  emerge  that  was  adapted  to  the 
details  of  the  quadrupedal  physical 
robot  that  was  used  in  the  experi-
ment.  the  third  evolutionary  algo-
rithm  then  uses  this  highly  t  simu-
lator to evolve control policies for the 
physical robot, and it was found that 
many  such  evolved  behaviors  trans-
ferred  successfully  from  simulation 
to reality.

this approach turned out to have 
an  added  advantage  over  previous 
attempts  to  cross  the  reality  gap: 
the  robot  could  recover  from  physi-
cal  damage  such  as  the  mechanical 
separation  of  one  of  its  four  legs.  if 
the  robot  experienced  such  damage 

review articles

while  behaving,  the  robot  could  not 
directly  sense  the  damage  but  there 
would be an inevitable change in the 
incoming sensor values. this change 
would  be  automatically  incorporated 
by  the  rst  evolutionary  algorithm 
into  new  simulations:  simulations  of 
a  three-legged  robot  would  gradually 
replace  simulations  of  a  four-legged 
robot.  these  new  simulations  would 
then be used to evolve new control pol-
icies for the damaged robot that would 
allow  it  to  automatically  compensate 
for its injury.

future work in this area would ben-
et  from  collaborations  with  develop-
ers  of  physical  simulation  such  that 
evolution could alter the physical con-
stants of the simulation itself, such as 
those used to model friction, collision, 
as well as aero- and hydrodynamics.

koos  et  al.16  recently  proposed  a 
different  approach  to  the  reality  gap 
problem.  control  policies  evolved  in 
simulation are transferred to a physical 
machine (figure 1f), and the disparity 
between the behavior observed in sim-
ulation and reality is measured. this is 
done for several controllers, and the re-
sulting disparity measures are used to 
create a model that predicts the dispar-
ity  of  control  policies  that  have  yet  to 
be validated on the physical machine. 
a multi-objective optimization is then 
employed to maximize the desired be-
havior  in  simulation  and  to  minimize 
predicted  disparity:  control  policies 
are  sought  that  generate  the  desired 
behavior  in  the  simulated  robot  and 
are likely to reproduce that behavior in 
the physical robot.

this  work  attempted  to  address 
a  seeming  trade-off  between  behav-
ioral  efficiency  and  transferability: 
the  more  efficient  the  robot  is  at  ex-
hibiting  a  desired  behavior  the  less 
likely  it  is  to  transfer  to  the  physical 
machine.  for  example  if  fast-legged 
locomotion is selected for in simula-
tion, running is more desirable than 
walking.  however,  running  requires 
the robots control policy to carefully 
manage  its  center  of  mass  to  avoid 
falling.  if  the  mass  distributions  of 
the simulated and physical robot are 
slightly  different,  running  behaviors 
may fail when transferred. this failure 
is  less  likely  for  walking  behaviors  in 
which the robots mass distribution is 
less important.

august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8  |  communications of the acm    81

one goal in 
evolutionary 
robotics in 
particular, and  
the eld of 
evolutionary 
computation  
in general, is  
to create 
increasingly 
evolvable 
algorithms.

review articles

most of the work on the reality gap 
problem  has  assumed  that  only  the 
control  policy  of  robots  will  be  trans-
ferred. lipson and pollack,18 however, 
integrated  an  evolutionary  robotics 
simulation  with  rapid  prototyping 
technology  to  automate  robot  manu-
facture as well as robot design (figure 
1c,  1d).  they  rst  evolved  the  body 
plans  and  control  policies  for  robots 
composed  of  linked  assemblages  of 
linear  actuators.  then,  the  3d  archi-
tectures  of  the  best  of  these  evolved 
robots were printed out of plastic; mo-
tors, circuitry, and batteries were then 
added  by  hand.  many  of  these  auto-
matically designed and manufactured 
robots were able to successfully repro-
duce the locomotion patterns original-
ly evolved in the simulator.

combinatorics of evaluation. it was 
identied  early  on  that  the  time  re-
quired to evaluate a single robot might 
grow  exponentially  with  the  number 
of parameters used to describe its task 
environment.22  for  example,  consider 
a  robot  that  must  grasp  m  different 
objects under n different lighting con-
ditions. each robot must be evaluated 
for how well it grabs each object under 
each  lighting  condition,  requiring  mn 
evaluations per robot. if there are p pa-
rameters  describing  the  task  environ-
ment and each parameter has s differ-
ent  settings,  then  each  robot  must  be 
evaluated sp times.

this  is  a  serious  challenge  in  the 
eld that has yet to be resolved. how-
ever,  one  possible  solution  to  this 
challenge  may  be  addressed  using 
co-evolution.  consider  a  population 
of  robots  and  a  second  population  of 
task environments competing against 
one another. the robots evolve to suc-
ceed  when  exposed  to  environments 
drawn from the pool of evolving envi-
ronments,  and  environments  evolve 
to  foil  the  abilities  of  the  evolving  ro-
bots.  this  is  not  unlike  prey  evolving 
to elude predators, while the predators 
evolve  to  catch  prey.  this  approach 
could, in the future, be used to evolve 
robots  that  successfully  generalize 
against a subset of task environments 
they might encounter when manufac-
tured and deployed.

evolvability.  evolving  all  aspects  of 
a complex machine such as a robot is 
a  daunting,  high-dimensional  optimi-
zation  problem.  biological  evolution 

82    communications of the acm   |  august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8

faces the same challenge yet seems to 
have addressed it by a process known 
as  the  evolution  of  evolvability.  a  spe-
cies  with  high  evolvability  is  dened 
as one that can more rapidly adapt to 
changes in its environment than a sim-
ilar species with lower evolvability.

one  goal  in  evolutionary  robotics 
in  particular,  and  the  eld  of  evolu-
tionary  computation  in  general,  is  to 
create 
increasingly  evolvable  algo-
rithms.  rather  than  independently 
optimizing  individual  parameters  of 
a candidate solution, such algorithms 
should  rapidly  discover  useful  aggre-
gate  patterns  in  candidate  solutions 
and  subsequently  elaborate  them.  it 
has been shown, for example, that ge-
nomes that encode formal grammars 
produce  robots  with  regular  struc-
ture, and that such genomes are more 
evolvable  than  genomes  that  do  not 
produce regular structures.12

similarly,  when  an  evolutionary 
algorithm  biased  toward  producing 
regular  patterns  was  used  to  evolve 
articial neural networks for robots it 
was found, again, that such networks 
more  rapidly  discover  desired  behav-
ior  compared  to  other  evolutionary 
methods  that  do  not  generate  such 
regularity.6  auerbach  and  bongard1 
have expanded the reach of this evolu-
tionary algorithm to shape robot body 
plans as well.

despite these recent advances, little 
is  known  about  how  to  design  evolu-
tionary  algorithms  that  reorganize 
genetic  representations  to  maximize 
evolvability  and  thus  automatically 
generate  adaptive  complex  machines 
in a reasonable amount of time.

fitness function design. the origi-
nal  and  continued  goal  of  evolution-
ary robotics is to make as few assump-
tions about the nal form of the robot 
or  the  kind  of  behavior  that  should 
be  generated.  however,  designing  a 
tness  function  that  rapidly  discov-
ers  desirable  solutions  without  bias-
ing  it  toward  particular  solutions  is 
notoriously  difcult.  for  this  reason 
there  have  been  efforts  in  the  eld  to 
eliminate  the  usage  of  a  tness  func-
tion  altogether.  one  recent  example 
is  novelty  search,  which  begins  with 
simple candidate solutions and gradu-
ally creates more complex solutions as 
optimization proceeds.17 the tness of 
any given solution is simply how much 

it  differs  from  previously  generated 
solutions. this approach was found to 
produce walking in simulated bipedal 
robots, a notoriously difcult problem 
in robotics.

conclusion
since  its  founding  in  the  early  1990s, 
evolutionary  robotics  has  remained  a 
small  but  productive  niche  eld.  al-
though the eld has yet to evolve a ro-
bot  that  is  superior  to  one  produced 
using mainstream optimization meth-
ods  such  as  reinforcement  learning, 
the eld has produced a wider variety 
of robots automatically. depending on 
how one counts, roboticists have man-
ually designed and built a few hundred 
different kinds of robots with human-
oid or legged or snakelike body plans. 
evolutionary  methods,  on  the  other 
hand have produced millions of differ-
ent kinds of robots that can walk (for 
example, figure 1ad), swim, or grasp 
objects.33  it  is  hoped  that  by  explor-
ing  all  the  different  ways  that  robots 
achieve  these  basic  competencies  we 
might gain unique insight into how to 
scale robots up to perform more com-
plex  tasks,  like  working  safely  along-
side a human.

moreover, several recent advances 
in  fields  outside  of  robotics  are  pro-
viding  opportunities  to  showcase 
the  advantages  of  this  evolutionary 
approach.  advances 
in  materials 
science  are  making  soft  robots  and 
modular  robots  a  reality,  yet  manu-
ally  designing  and  controlling  such 
robots  is  much  less  intuitive  than 
traditional  rigid  and  monolithic  ro-
bots.  advances  in  automated  fabri-
cation are bringing the possibility of 
continuous  and  automated  design, 
manufacture,  and  deployment  of  ro-
bots  within  reach.  state-of-the-art 
evolutionary algorithms and physical 
simulators  are  making  it  possible  to 
optimize all aspects of a robots body 
plan  and  control  policy  simultane-
ously  in  a  reasonable  time  period. 
and  finally,  new  insights  from  evo-
lutionary  biology  and  neuroscience 
are  informing  our  ability  to  create 
increasingly  complex,  autonomous, 
and adaptive machines.

acknowledgments
this work was supported by the national 
science  foundation  (nsf)  under  grant  

pecase-0953837,  and  by  the  defense 
advanced  research  projects  agency 
(darpa) under grants w911nf-11-1-0076 
and fa8650-11-1-7155. 

references
1.  auerbach, j.e. and bongard, j.c. on the relationship 

between environmental and morphological complexity 
in evolved robots. in proceedings of the 2012 genetic 
and evolutionary computation conference, 521528.
2.  beer, r.d. the dynamics of brain-body-environment 

systems: a status report. handbook of cognitive 
science: an embodied approach (2008), 99120.

3.  bongard, j. morphological change in machines 
accelerates the evolution of robust behavior. in 
proceedings of the national academy of sciences 108, 
4 (2011), 1234.

4.  bongard, j. zykov, v. and lipson, h. resilient machines 
through continuous self-modeling. science 314 (2006), 
11181121.

5.  cheney, n., maccurdy, r., clune, j. and lipson, h. 
unshackling evolution: evolving soft robots with 
multiple materials and a powerful generative 
encoding. in proceedings of the genetic and 
evolutionary computation conference. acm, ny, 2013. 

6.  clune, j., beckmann, b.e., ofria, c. and r.t. pennock, 

r.t. evolving coordinated quadruped gaits with the 
hyperneat generative encoding. ieee congress on 
evolutionary computation (2009), 27642771.

7.  collins, s., ruina, a., tedrake, r. and wisse, m. efcient 

bipedal robots based on passive-dynamic walkers. 
science 307, 5712 (2005), 10821085.

8.  edlund, j.a., chaumont, n., hintze, a., koch, c., tononi, 

g. and adami, c. integrated information increases 
with tness in the evolution of animats. plos 
computational biology 7, 10 (2011).

9.  floreano, d. and mattiussi, c. bio-inspired articial 
intelligence: theories, methods, and technologies. 
mit press, cambridge, ma, 2008.

10.  frutiger, d.r., bongard, j.c. and iida, f. iterative 

product engineering: evolutionary robot design. in 
proceedings of the fifth international conference 
on climbing and walking robots. p. bidaud and f.b. 
amar, eds. professional engineering publishing, 2002, 
619629.

11.  hauert, s., zufferey, j.c. and floreano, d. evolved 

swarming without positioning information: 
an application in aerial communication relay. 
autonomous robotics 26 (2009), 2132.

12.  hornby, g.s. and pollack, j.b. creating high-level 

components with a generative representation for body-
brain evolution. articial life 8, 3 (2002), 223246.

13.  iida, f. and laschi, c. soft robotics: challenges and 
perspectives. procedia computer science 7 (2011), 
99102.

14.  izquierdo, e. and buhrmann, t. analysis of a 

dynamical recurrent neural network evolved for 
two qualitatively different tasks: walking and 
chemotaxis. articial life xi: proceedings of the 
11th international conference on the simulation and 
synthesis of living systems. mit press, cambridge, 
ma, 2008, 257264.

15.  jakobi, n., husbands, p. and harvey, i. noise and the 

reality gap: the use of simulation in evolutionary 
robotics. advances in articial life (1995), 704720.

16.  koos, s., mouret, j.-m. and s. doncieux, s. the 

transferability approach: crossing the reality gap 
in evolutionary robotics. ieee transactions on 
evolutionary computation (2012); doi: 10.1109/
tevc.2012.2185849.

17.  lehman, j. and stanley, k.o. abandoning objectives: 

evolution through the search for novelty alone. 
evolutionary computation 19, 2 (2011), 189223.
18.  lipson, h. and pollack, j.b. automatic design and 

manufacture of articial lifeforms. nature 406 (2000), 
974978.

19.  long, j. darwins devices: what evolving robots can 
teach us about the history of life and the future of 
technology. basic books, 2012.

20.  luke, s. and spector, l. evolving teamwork and 

coordination with genetic programming. in 
proceedings of the first annual conference on 
genetic programming. mit press, cambridge, ma, 
150156. 

21.  lungarella, m., metta, g., pfeifer, r. and sandini, g. 

developmental robotics: a survey. connection science 
15, 4 (2003), 151190.

22.  mataric, m. and cliff, d. challenges in evolving 

review articles

controllers for physical robots. robotics and 
autonomous systems 19 (1996), 6784.

23.  meng, y., zhang, y. and jin, y. autonomous self-
reconguration of modular robots by evolving a 
hierarchical mechanochemical model. computational 
intelligence magazine 6, 1 (2011). ieee, 4354.

24.  miglino, o., lund, h.h. and s. nol, s. evolving mobile 
robots in simulated and real environments. articial 
life 2, 4 (1995), 417434.

25.  paul, c. morphological computation: a basis for the 
analysis of morphology and control requirements. 
robotics and autonomous systems 54, 8 (2006), 
619630.

26.  paul, c., valero-cuevas, f.j. and lipson, h. design 

and control of tensegrity robots for locomotion. ieee 
transactions on robotics 22, 5 (2006), 944957.

27.  pfeifer, r. and bongard, j. how the body shapes the 

way we think: a new view of intelligence. mit 
press, cambridge, ma, 2006.

28. polani, d., sporns, o. and lungarella, m. how 

information and embodiment shape intelligent 
information processing. in 50 years of articial 
intelligence, springer, 2007, 99111.

29.  quinn, m. smith, l., mayley, g. and husbands, p. 
evolving controllers for a homogeneous system 
of physical robots: structured cooperation with 
minimal sensors. philosophical transactions of the 
royal society of london. series a: mathematical, 
physical and engineering sciences 361, 1811 (2003), 
23212343.

30.  reil, y. and husbands, p. evolution of central pattern 
generators for bipedal walking in a real-time physics 
environment. ieee transactions on evolutionary 
computation 6, 2 (2002), 159168.

31.  reynolds, c.w. flocks, herds and schools: a 

distributed behavioral model. in acm siggraph 
computer graphics 21 (1987), 2534.

32.  rieffel, j., saunders, f., nadimpalli, s., zhou, h., 

hassoun, s., rife, j. and trimmer, b. evolving soft 
robotic locomotion in physx. in proceedings of the 
11th annual conference companion on genetic and 
evolutionary computation conference: late breaking 
papers. acm, ny, 2009, 24992504.

33.  rubenstein, m., ahler, c. and nagpal, r. kilobot: a low-
cost scalable robot system for collective behanviors. 
in proceedings of 2012 ieee international 
conference on robotics and automation. ieee, 
32933298. 

34.  sims, k. evolving 3d morphology and behaviour by 

competition. articial life. rodney a. brooks and 
pattie maes, eds, (2009), 2839.

35.  tuci, e., massera, g., and nol, s. active categorical 

perception of object shapes in a simulated 
anthropomorphic robotic arm. ieee transactions on 
evolutionary computation 14, 6 (2010), 885899.

36.  werner, g.m. and dyer, m.g. evolution of 

communication in articial organisms. in proceedings 
of the second international conference of articial 
life. d. farmer, c. langton, s. rasmussen, and c. 
taylor, eds, (1991), 659687.

37.  williams, p. and beer, r. information dynamics 

of evolved agents. in proceedings of the 11th 
international conference on simulation of adaptive 
behavior. s. doncieux, b. girard, a. guillot, j. hallam, 
j.-a. meyer, and j-b. mouret, eds. springer, 2010, 
3849.

38.  wischmann, s., floreano, d. and keller, l. historical 

contingency affects signaling strategies and 
competitive abilities in evolving populations of 
simulated robots. in proceedings of the national 
academy of sciences 109, 3 (2012), 864868.

39.  yim, m., shen, w.m., salemi, b., rus, d., moll, m., 
lipson, h., klavins, e. and chirikjian, g.s. modular 
self-recongurable robot systems (grand challenges 
of robotics). robotics & automation magazine 14, 1 
(2007). ieee, 4352. 

40. zahadat, p., christensen, d., schultz, u., katebi, s. and 

stoy, k. fractal gene regulatory networks for robust 
locomotion control of modular robots. in proceedings 
of the 11th international conference on simulation of 
adaptive behavior. s. doncieux, b. girard, a. guillot, j. 
hallam, j.-a. meyer, and j-b. mouret, eds. springer, 
2010, 544554.

josh c. bongard (josh.bongard@uvm.edu) is director of 
the morphology, evolution and cognition laboratory in 
the department of computer science at the university of 
vermont. he is also a member of the vermont advanced 
computing core and the complex systems center.

copyright held by owners/author(s).

august 2013  |  vol. 56  |  no. 8  |  communications of the acm    83

